#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass llncs
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style splncs04
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\branch long-version
\selected 0
\filename_suffix 0
\color #faf0e6
\end_branch
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 11page%
\topmargin 8pheight%
\rightmargin 11page%
\bottommargin 10pheight%
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\listings_params "basicstyle={\ttfamily},basewidth={0.45em}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Here and Now
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepštas 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
orcidID{0000-0002-2557-740X}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Institute
BrainyBlaze, OpenCog Foundation 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
email{<linasvepstas@gmail.com>}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
It is plainly obvious that we cannot change the past, that the future remains
 unwritten, and that brains use memories of the past to predict the future.
 There seems to be only one real, actual world, and we are trapped in the
 here–and–now.
 Modern–day physics offers no explanations for these self–evident truths.
 What it does offer seems to counter them: microscopic dynamics is time–reversib
le.
 Ideas of the multiverse suggest an overwhelming number of parallel universes.
 Determinism is used to argue against free will.
 But if the future is predetermined, and the death of the antelope in the
 jaws of a tiger is inevitable, then why would nature have bothered giving
 either a brain? Perhaps brains alter outcomes, after all.
 This essay attempts to review and reconcile a collection of such plainly
 obvious yet discordant facts.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Most 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
btprint "btPrintCited"
bibfiles "../lang"
options "splncs04"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
