#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\listings_params "basicstyle={\ttfamily},basewidth={0.45em}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Purely Symbolic Induction of Structure
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
February 2022
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Techniques honed for the induction of grammar from text corpora can be extended
 to visual, auditory and other sensory domains, providing a structure for
 such senses that can be understood in terms of symbols and grammars.
 This simultaneously solves the classical 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

symbol grounding problem
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 while also providing a pragmatic approach to developing practical software
 systems that can articulate the world around us in a symbolic, communicable
 fashion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The symbolic approach to cognition is founded on the idea that observed
 nature can be categorized into distinct entities which are involved in
 relationships with one another.
 In this approach, the primary challenges are to recognize entities, and
 to discover what relationships there are between them.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The recognition problem is to be applied to sensory input.
 That is, we cannot know nature directly, as it is, but only by means of
 observation and sensing.
 Conventionally, this can be taken to be the classical five senses: hearing,
 touch, smell, vision, taste; or, more generally, scientific instruments
 and engineered detectors.
 Such sensors generate collections of data; this may be time-ordered, or
 simply a jumbled bag of datapoints.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Out of this jumble of data, the goal of entity detection is to recognize
 groupings of data that 
\emph on
always
\emph default
 occur together.
 The adverb 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
always
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 here is key: entities are those things that are not events: they have existence
 over extended periods of time (Heidegger's 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Dasein
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

).
 The goal of relationship detection is to determine both the structure of
 entities (part-whole relationships) as well as events (statistical co-occurance
s and causation).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If one is somehow able to detect and discern entities, and observe frequent
 relationships between them, then the path to symbolic processing becomes
 accessible.
 Each entity can be assigned a symbol (thus resolving the famous 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

symbol grounding problem
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

), and conventional ideas about information theory can be applied to perform
 reasoning, inference and deduction.
 Here, the words 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

information theory
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 are taken in the broadest sense: not just signal processing and finite
 state transducers, but also Bayesian nets, theorem provers and Turing machines;
 the whole of what is computationally accessible in the current era.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The goal of this paper is to develop a general theory for the conversion
 of sensory data into symbolic relationships.
 It is founded both on a collection of mathematical formalisms and also
 on a collection of experimental results.
 The experimental results are presented in a companion text; this text focuses
 on presenting the mathematical foundations in as simple and direct a fashion
 as possible.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The organization is as follows.
 First, the general relationship between graphs and grammars is sketched
 out, attempting to illustrate just how broad, general and all-encompassing
 this is.
 Next, it is shown how this symbolic structure can be extended to visual
 and auditory perception.
 After this comes a mathematical deep-dive, reviewing how statistical principles
 can be used to discern relationships between entities.
 Working backwards, a practical algorithm is presented for extracting entities
 themselves.
 To conclude, a collection of hypothesis and wild speculations are presented.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
From Graphs to Grammar
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Assuming that sensory data can be categorized into entities and relationships,
 the natural information-theoretic setting would seem to be graphs: each
 entity is represented by a vertex, each relationship is represented by
 an edge.
 In the most simplistic terms, vertexes are labelled with symbols, and edges
 with symbol pairs.
 There do arise problems of well-foundedness: if an entity is made of parts,
 does this mean that a vertex is made of parts? This question will be addressed
 shortly; 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
The End
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is the end.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
