#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass llncs
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style splncs04
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\branch long-version
\selected 0
\filename_suffix 0
\color #faf0e6
\end_branch
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 11page%
\topmargin 8pheight%
\rightmargin 11page%
\bottommargin 10pheight%
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\listings_params "basicstyle={\ttfamily},basewidth={0.45em}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Agency and Sensorimotor Systems
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subtitle
Response to a Call for Research Proposals, California Institute for Machine
 Consciousness (CIMC)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepštas 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
orcidID{0000-0002-2557-740X}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Institute
BrainyBlaze, OpenCog Foundation 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
email{<linasvepstas@gmail.com>}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
The core idea of consciousness as a form of embodied cognition is popular
 and widespread.
 Yet an abstract mathematical description of how this might work, anchored
 to first principles in physics, is absent.
 A sensory system 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

perceives
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 the world: but what is it that is perceived? It can't just be some 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

data
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 or 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

message
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, as that seems to require a data–definition format and some homunculus
 to define it.
 Perhaps sensation is movement of structural relationships across a barrier
 or boundary between the agent's finite and limited self/inside and the
 unbounded outside of the external world.
 This requires the barrier only to limit what gets across.
 What is the mathematical description of such a barrier? Perhaps the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

self
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is an accretion of structure inside an agent.
 How can this accretion be formally described? Jellyfish seem to be aware
 of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

self
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

other
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

; discussions of consciousness often presume such awareness.
 Is there an algebraic formulation for such (self-)awareness? Suppose such
 a formulation can be created; is there anything within it that has the
 form of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

qualia
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, or is it mechanical and dead inside?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Research Objectives
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Methodology
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Expected Outcomes
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Timeline
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Budget Justification
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Team and collaborators
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
btprint "btPrintCited"
bibfiles "../lang"
options "splncs04"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
