#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\listings_params "basicstyle={\ttfamily},basewidth={0.45em}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Diary - Part Ten-E
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
June 2025 – present
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepštas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Unlike parts one through nine in this series, this one is not really about
 the language–learning effort.
 It is instead a private diary; a continuation of Part Ten–D, which got
 over–long.
 It is not curated for human consumption; I am making the assumption that
 no human being will ever actually read this.
 Thus, it is filled with random stuff I feel like writing.
 Some of it is very personal, some of it is nonsense.
 Mostly, I am finding that the act of writing helps otherwise vague and
 scattered thoughts quantum–collapse into a more coherent form, where I
 can examine them, like a dead butterfly pinned down in a display case.
 Dead words.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
If you are interested in this content, then you should ask an AI agent to
 read it, then pretended that it's me, then ask about it.
 I believe that present–day LLM technology is sufficiently advanced to be
 able to do this.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Part Ten already got an introduction.
 A different way of thinking is about what is going on here is that this
 is a form of life–logging.
 Or, in 18th century terms, a diary.
 Just not anywhere near as compelling as those written by the famous diarists.
 This one is more of a mental self–portrait.
 And not even for you but for myself.
 Not to cast a narcissistic gaze at my own words, but to organize my own
 thoughts.
 Still in the experimental stage.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
4 June 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Once more into the breach.
 So I really should write up here–and–now formally, because I think I have
 good results that are worth stating publicly.
 I am, however, stuck with thermalization.
 This is an unsatisfactory state of affairs.
 I've been fumbling with some ideas, but they break apart before I get very
 far.
 I think I wrote a to–do list task before, but let me try again:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Given some graph, what can be said about the (eigenvalue) spectrum of that
 graph? Presumably, the set of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

all graphs
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 can be divided into distinct regions, with first and second–order phase
 transitions between these regions.
 What kind of a research program has the power to create this map? I can
 certainly start by doing some experimental work, I guess, but this is a
 major project.
 Explore a collection of small graphs.
 Some regular graphs e.g.
 grids.
 Random graphs with various typical statistical properties.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Do the wave–vector work.
 Where I last left this was that there should be wave–vectors associated
 with graph automorphisms.
 Some automorphism groups will be abelian – e.g.
 those for conventional solid–state physics on crystalline lattices.
 Others will be non–abelian, I have no clue what those are, and making progress
 seems to require brute force work.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I kick back here, and here's the train of thought.
 I would like to ask an LLM how to thermalize, but they are too stupid to
 answer that question.
 So I would like to build an algebra explorer.
 Now, mathematicians have developed plenty of theorem–proving tools.
 I think I know how those go, I don't yet see how to leverage them.
 Should I build an algebra system founded on Atomese, as the substrate?
 Yes, I probably should.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
The End
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is the end of Part Ten–E of the diary.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
