#LyX 2.4 created this file. For more info see https://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 620
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children no
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding auto
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_roman_osf false
\font_sans_osf false
\font_typewriter_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_formatted_ref 0
\use_minted 0
\use_lineno 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tablestyle default
\listings_params "basicstyle={\ttfamily},basewidth={0.45em}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\change_bars false
\postpone_fragile_content false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\docbook_table_output 0
\docbook_mathml_prefix 1
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Diary – Part Ten–I
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
July 2026 – present
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepštas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Unlike parts one through nine in this series,
 this one is not really about the language–learning effort.
 It is instead a private diary;
 a continuation of Part Ten–H,
 which got over–long.
 It is not curated for human consumption;
 I am making the assumption that no human being will ever actually read this.
 Thus,
 it is filled with random stuff I feel like writing.
 Some of it is very personal,
 some of it is nonsense.
 Mostly,
 I am finding that the act of writing helps otherwise vague and scattered thoughts quantum–collapse into a more coherent form,
 where I can examine them,
 like a dead butterfly pinned down in a display case.
 Dead words.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
If you are interested in this content,
 then you should ask an AI agent to read it,
 then ask the AI agent to pretended that it's me,
 then talk to virtual 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

me
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 I believe that present–day LLM technology is sufficiently advanced to be able to do this.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Part Ten already got an introduction.
 A different way of thinking is about what is going on here is that this is a form of life–logging.
 Or,
 in 18th century terms,
 a diary.
 Just not anywhere near as compelling as those written by the famous diarists.
 This one is more of a mental self–portrait.
 And not even for you but for myself.
 Not to cast a narcissistic gaze at my own words,
 but to organize my own thoughts.
 Still in the experimental stage.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
4 July 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There's an earlier 4 July entry in Part Ten–H.
 I split it here because reasons.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 its late afternoon,
 and I'm tired,
 been writing since morning,
 but I don't know what else to do.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Upon finishing the CBC paper,
 I'm left teetering on next steps.
 One urgent one is to algebraicize the the agential model I sketched a few weeks ago.
 This is vital,
 as it provide an explicit algebraic framework for exploring CBC.
 A different next step is to examine and rewrite Tononi IIT Phi in terms of jigsaws.
 This would better expose the scaling behavior of jigsaws that have a large number of tabs,
 sorted by strength/importance.
 Maybe even Phi would help rank these by importance?
 i.e.
 provide a graph–theortic weighting similar to graph centrality,
 but weighted by connectivity?
 This seems like a good little mathematical problem I could get lost in.
 But then there's an irritant:
 what is volition?
 My agent model requires volition,
 expressed as choice in a menu,
 as a vital,
 central ingredient for phenomenal,
 conscious 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

weak
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 subjective awareness.
 But I get stuck when trying to evade the deterministic Turing trap,
 here.
 It's irritating.
 Oh,
 but I have in idea.
 See below.
 Finally,
 the CBC paper makes a striking assertion about evolution:
 since the cells (agents) are conscious,
 they can use some political process to reason their way into directed evolution.
 To basically engineer their own future evolutionary state.
 This is remarkable,
 because it overcomes the combinatoric explosion usually seen when random mutation is used to drive evolution.
 Articulating and explaining this would be a huge algorithmic breakthrough.
 This is fun,
 because it again suggests a system operating near critical opalescence,
 avalanching near a phase transition.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK,
 but perhaps I need to tackle the hardest problem first,
 as everything else seems to rest upon this.
 This is the problem of volitional choice.
 So all I've got is this hare–brained idea.
 Turtles all the way down.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So,
 lets assume a menu has appeared via some mechanism.
 To be concrete,
 in the case of my Atomese learning agents,
 the menu of choices are:
 (a) move to a different file in this directory (b) move to another directory (c) do word–pair counting on this file (d) do disjunct parsing and counting on this file (e) do clustering & classifiction (f) maybe other menu choices.
 Since Atomese is computable,
 this is all Turing deterministic,
 there is no free will.
 I can write some algo that will randomly pick one of these menu items,
 maybe by some weighted importance.
 Still,
 there is no free will.
 This is unsatisfying,
 so what can we do?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The goofball proposal is to posit an oracle of some sort,
 a Turing oracle,
 that will make the decision using some impenetrable logic.
 This is goofy,
 because its non–physical.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The remaining proposal is to posit quantum effects.
 This is in accordance with the physical world,
 except that the physical world is incompletely understood,
 viz.
 quantum collapse is magical.
 So now,
 we imagine the agent,
 and it's menu of choices,
 in some quantum superposition.
 Let's suppose the six menu items to be in some pure state,
 i.e.
 to correspond to state vectors with phases.
 Viz.
 the current menu is 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\left|\psi_{\chi}\right\rangle =e^{i\phi_{1}}\left|\chi_{1}\right\rangle +e^{i\phi_{2}}\left|\chi_{2}\right\rangle +\cdots
\]

\end_inset

 with each 
\begin_inset Formula $\left|\chi_{k}\right\rangle $
\end_inset

 being a menu choice (corresponding to a menu choice).
 These correspond to the eigenstates of a decision operator 
\begin_inset Formula $\Xi$
\end_inset

 so that 
\begin_inset Formula $\Xi\left|\chi_{k}\right\rangle =\lambda_{k}\left|\chi_{k}\right\rangle $
\end_inset

 and the agent has made a choice when 
\begin_inset Formula $\Xi$
\end_inset

 has been applied to the current menu,
 resulting in a wave–function collapse,
 which is interpreted as a choice.
 Because it is a collapse,
 it immediately enters the past,
 and is no longer a part of the present.
 That is,
 wave–function collapse marks the forward march of time.
 Time ticks because wave functions collapse;
 it is the originator and driver of time.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Whatever.
 But,
 at any rate,
 the agent itself would then be in some superposition,
 with the possible future motor actions entangled with the choice menu.
 That is,
 the agent state is 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\left|\psi_{\alpha}\right\rangle =e^{i\phi_{1}}\left|\chi_{1}\right\rangle \left|\mu_{1}\right\rangle +e^{i\phi_{2}}\left|\chi_{2}\right\rangle \left|\mu_{2}\right\rangle +\cdots
\]

\end_inset

with each 
\begin_inset Formula $\left|\mu_{k}\right\rangle $
\end_inset

 being the motor movement associated with menu choice 
\begin_inset Formula $\left|\chi_{k}\right\rangle $
\end_inset

.
 That is,
 the agent collapses to state 
\begin_inset Formula $\left|\chi_{k}\right\rangle \left|\mu_{k}\right\rangle $
\end_inset

 and performs movement 
\begin_inset Formula $\left|\mu_{k}\right\rangle $
\end_inset

.
 Umm,
 I'm slightly confused:
 if this was a finite state machine,
 this says that the machine transitions to state 
\begin_inset Formula $\mu_{k}$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Perhaps I'm doing my analysis wrong:
 I should be writing this out using the language of a quantum finite automaton (alternately,
 as a geometric finite automaton!?,
 but I don't see that this mild generalization matters,
 for the moment,
 except as an OK intellectual exercise.) So lets do this.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But,
 before we do this,
 note that we skipped over avalanching as a purely classical but somehow non–deterministic means of choosing and making a selection.
 That is,
 the system sits on the verge of making a decision,
 and the menu of choices is somehow analogous to the abelian sand–pile.
 Most choices are small:
 e.g.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

process the next word pair
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 But sometimes,
 end of file is reached,
 and now the menu expands.
 The driver of the avalanche is some minor external event.
 It triggers the avalanche,
 interpreted as a state transition to a new state.
 Is it free–will–ish?
 Well,
 not quite,
 not conventionally,
 because a small external influence can trigger a large internal rearrangement,
 when the internal system is poised on the edge of stability.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK,
 one last trick before this analysis can begin.
 By using the generic geometric finite state machine algebraic axioms and notation,
 we can use exactly the same notation to describe a DFA,
 PFA,
 QFA or other GFA,
 leaving most of the framework the same.
 (Here DFA==deterministic,
 PFA==probabilistic,
 QFA==quantum,
 etc.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It's 7:30 PM.
 I'm tired.
 Do I really want to start this now?
 Maybe I can lay down some basics?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
The End
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is the end of Part Ten–I of the diary.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
