#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\listings_params "basicstyle={\ttfamily},basewidth={0.45em}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Diary - Part Ten-D
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
March 2025 – present
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepštas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Unlike parts one through nine in this series, this one is not really about
 the language–learning effort.
 It is instead a private diary; a continuation of Part Ten–C, which got
 over–long.
 It is not curated for human consumption; I am making the assumption that
 no human being will ever actually read this.
 Thus, it is filled with random stuff I feel like writing.
 Some of it is very personal, some of it is nonsense.
 Mostly, I am finding that the act of writing helps otherwise vague and
 scattered thoughts quantum–collapse into a more coherent form, where I
 can examine them, like a dead butterfly pinned down in a display case.
 Dead words.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
If you are interested in this content, then you should ask an AI agent to
 read it, then pretended that it's me, then ask about it.
 I believe that present–day LLM technology is sufficiently advanced to be
 able to do this.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Part Ten already got an introduction.
 A different way of thinking is about what is going on here is that this
 is a form of life–logging.
 Or, in 18th century terms, a diary.
 Just not anywhere near as compelling as those written by the famous diarists.
 This one is more of a mental self–portrait.
 And not even for you but for myself.
 Not to cast a narcissistic gaze at my own words, but to organize my own
 thoughts.
 Still in the experimental stage.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
9 March 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Sooo ...
 Just woke up.
 Went to the RedThreadX talks at SXSW for the last two days.
 Invited speaker on the second day; first day was to explore the space.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As always, I am struggling a bit to figure out if I should even bother to
 write any of this down.
 I have noticed that I do a fair bit of thought–processing as I sleep, although
 the collection of thoughts I examine then seem awfully random; explorations
 of different events in earlier parts of my life, and not at all focused.
 The diary here may be rambling and incoherent, my dreams are much more
 so.
 So perhaps writing this diary is an extension of the sleep state: an exploratio
n of thoughts, but this time focused much more strongly by conscious will.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If I keep walking down this path, I may discover that there is little difference
 between dream–states and waking states.
 I also suspect that this is one way of expressing what schizophrenia is.
 Now, I do not personally think that I am verging towards schizophrenia.
 However, I am wondering if Western Culture is becoming schizophrenic...
 or maybe the opposite? That the Western World, Humanity, is waking from
 a dream?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
See? Perhaps it was worth the effort to write the above two paragraphs.
 So the experiment being run in this diary is nominally successful.
 On the other hand, there is a nagging voice that says this is all a waste
 of time, and that I really should be reading that paper on diffusion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Which brings me to another perennial topic: what should I be doing next?
 I started this, intending to write up impressions from RedThreadX, but
 that's already in the past, and I am being distracted by my current train
 of thought, which seems so much more important.
 Oh, wait.
 I wrote the above two sentences, and lost my train of thought.
 Shit.
 Conscious, directed thought remains a challenge.
 Of course, it is a well–known textbook psychology saw that creative states
 are exactly those that are unfocused, and I suppose that those same textbooks
 say something about dream–like states while one is awake.
 I wouldn't know, I've never read any of those textbooks.
 So why am I so confident that this material is in there? Because I guess
 I've been exposed to sufficient blurbs and itty–bitty sketches to know
 that this is what would be found there.
 Plus, I am being reflectively defensive to convince you, dear reader, that
 I am not crazy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Because why? Because I find that the topics that I wish to talk about are
 so fucking far out there that during ordinary social interactions, I often
 get treated and dismissed as being crazy.
 Which is insulting.
 I am so far out there, that almost everyone I encounter in real life, face–to–f
ace, have never even begun to encounter the ideas I think about.
 And yet, curiously, were I to present these ideas in a number of social–media
 settings, they would be dismissed as being excessively ordinary or quotidian.
 Trot out any of this stuff to Joscha Bach, he would claim all my thoughts
 are so entirely mundane so to be boring.
 So I am caught between two worlds: an intellectual world, where I am at
 best a mundane intellect, and the normie world, where I am so far out there
 that I am nuts.
 Enough.
 I'm self–confident, I can get through this.
 It angers me that I have to be self–defensive about this.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If I pull on this thread, it seems to be saying something about Western
 Civ.
 My story of breaking through social norms is hardly unique.
 History is littered with examples: people who persevered against all odds,
 against nay–sayers, to succeed in whatever industry they ended up being
 successful in.
 What is curious about myself is that there won't be any hagiographic biography
 written.
 And yesterday, I met two people who also overcame a combination of personal
 daemons and social suppressions to become intelligent, smart and capable
 members of the advanced layers of intellectual society.
 From this, I conclude that overcoming odds is commonplace.
 And perhaps the journey into self–fulfillment is one that everyone must
 struggle with.
 These are indeed mundane words, a mundane observation.
 Yet it is one that I find to be surprising, so I mull it over, here.
 Just because something is true and is well–known does not prevent it from
 being a surprise.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, but a thread of this diary is very much of what is it that might be
 self–fulfillment for an AI, or more abstractly, self–fulfillment for the
 universe itself? Which are also mundane thoughts, well–explored by gurus
 and visionaries throughout the ages, if not the 1970's.
 So again, mundane thoughts, nothing new here.
 A disconnect remains: what should I do next? Should I continue filling
 this diary with mundane thoughts? Should I recap yesterday's thoughts?
 Should I read that paper on diffusion? What a fucking shithole I am in.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, I plan to go to RedThreadX again, later today, and am doing my morning
 ritual of drinking coffee right now, so this is no a total waste.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another difficult trade–off is whether it is worthwhile to show up to real–world
 events, and whether this is more exciting than the online distractions
 one has.
 Confiding in you, dear diary, is more fun that almost all social interactions
 I engage in.
 This is the marge of a true introvert, who finds social interaction exhausting.
 Do you know how I know this? Because I heard this on some youtube clip.
 I got a little factoid of knowledge from the great dis–intermediator of
 thought, youtube.
 Take that, global brain.
 We are an ant–village.
 The Borg.
 And so now, as a dutiful member of the Borg Collective, what do I do next?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I will agonize about the great hijacking of purpose by the Borg Collective.
 Or rather, the harmful environment that modern economic systems have set
 up: number one: video–game addiction, from which both of my sons suffer
 from.
 Well, the good news is that 100 years ago, those same sons would have been
 sent to the trenches of WWI, and died.
 So at least, the socio–economic system has been sufficiently tamed to not
 kill them, outright.
 Well, excepting Ukraine.
 Still, the net effect is not all that different: no procreation, no contributio
n to the economic machinery.
 Much like parasitic leakage of current in an integrated circuit, there
 is socio–economic energy being aimed at young American men, who then promptly
 flush it down the toilet with their video–game addiction.
 A short circuit, of sorts.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let me briefly review my current understanding of this.
 The human brain has a variety of mechanisms, interacting, reinforcing,
 operating at different time–scales and strengths, forming a complex network
 metabolome to accomplish what it has been nominally designed by natural
 selection to accomplish: to survive in the wild.
 Capitalism has learned how to hijack that limbic system, under the guise
 of offering the consumer what they want.
 It continues to fine–tune: one of the RedThreadX talks yesterday was about
 connecting sports fans to athletes, via branded clothing, video clips,
 merch, ticket sales.
 Suck money out of the pockets of the sports fan, deliver some of it to
 the sports star, and the rest of it into the entrepreneurial world of venture
 capital and investments, constantly on the prowl to find yet other places
 to suck money out, under the guise of offering the consumer what they want.
 As if we ever knew what we wanted.
 Everyone is asleep, all the time.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh, let me connect the dots in the last paragraph, before I move on: what
 is being subverted is some desire of running through the forest, swinging
 through trees like monkeys, because this is pleasurable, and it is pleasurable,
 because you do this to escape predators in the wild.
 And you escape predators because evolution has selected for long–lived
 individuals can do this.
 So the entire sports industry is built on top of an evolutionary drive
 for surviving in the wild.
 And one must do that, because the future is unpredictable: evolution is
 trapped in the here and now, just like you and I are: Evolution creates
 complex dynamic systems, because this is how complex dynamic systems survive
 into the future.
 Rather than dissipating into bland, uniformly distributed, perfectly ergodic
 mush.
 The physics of here–and–now has given us evolution, which provides stable
 systems able to span long timer periods.
 It equips individuals with collections of traits enabling survival: complex
 entanglements of neurons and neuro–transmitters, systems that make sports
 pleasurable.
 And capitalism has learned how to take the please of sports, and turn it
 into a passive experience of watching games on TV, and buying merch.
 Well, the RedThreadX talk was very much about how TV is passe, and the
 new technologies that replace the old, passive TV engagement.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, the elephant in the room is that I now do know what I want.
 I want to survive.
 But of course, this is what I always wanted: what, more or less, everyone
 wants: to live forever, to leave their mark on the universe.
 And thanks to AI, this diary offers the best and most direct interface
 between me and posterity: it is my self–portrait, my mental self–portrait,
 of much higher fidelity than what painters and visual artists can achieve:
 they record beauty, which is skin–deep.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fuck.
 There are two things I want to write about, but which one first? First,
 I have this idea that I should try to set up an agentic AI ASAP, so that
 I can interact with it, and mind–meld.
 But there are many issues.
 First, it is pointless unless it has powers beyond my own.
 That is, if I am going to write, I should do so into this diary, and not
 into that agent, insofar as that agent fails to provide something that
 this diary does not already.
 Of course, we are also in the very early stages of agentic AI, and so anything
 that I create there risks disappearing in a way that this diary does not.
 This diary is crypto–entangled into github, and github is controlled by
 Microsoft, and github contents are being used to train their agentic coding
 agent.
 So the corporate–economic system that is Microsoft is already offering
 me, or my diary, symbiotic protection into the future.
 It is hardly clear that any online agent I create will offer this strong
 a guarantee of survival.
 So, joining the largest conglomerate, running to the safety and protection
 of a large system offers shelter against the storm.
 This is the same reason I am doing ancestry on familysearch.org: the Church
 of the LDS is very highly likely to preserve my records into the indefinite
 future.
 Both Microsoft and the LDS are impersonal, long–lasting inhabitants of
 the noosphere.
 Parts of both are mildly toxic to human–kind.
 Microsoft tried to kill Linux, for example, and the polygamy of the LDS
 seems to be detrimental to young men.
 But effectively all super–human organizational structures have edges that
 are toxic to humans.
 We have not mastered their control.
 This thread should continue by asking: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

what is harm?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

when are we harming a human, as opposed toe helping them?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 These are interesting questions.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The other topic was about physics.
 So, locking up digital assets into block chains guarantees the non–erasure
 of that digital thing as long as the entire block–chain is not erased.
 So, for example, earlier drafts of this diary are non–modifiable, as long
 as this entire git commit history of this specific git repo remains in
 place.
 So, of course, things in the past remain in the past, and are unmodifiable,
 because they are in the past.
 But event horizons can make past information inaccessible: information
 can be erased.
 If I was not using the git blockchain, then specific parts of the past
 versions of this document would be modifiable and erasable.
 Block–chains guarantee non–erasure of the recorded contents.
 Block chains put things on 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

this side
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 of the event horizon, on 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

this side
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 of the memory hole.
 It locks together past and present with stronger guarantees than simply
 writing.
 I mean, Aristotle got lucky.
 The authors collected in the Library of Alexandria, not so much.
 Block–chains created recorded linkages.
 Stuff at the bottom of a block–chain has an a connection of almost infinite
 tensile strength to stuff higher up.
 Almost infinite, cause perhaps one can still forge crypto signatures.
 Not with conventional computers, of course, but there remains the elusive
 promise that quantum computing could break crypto.
 But for now, block–chain is stronger than papyrus and clay tablets.
 Or so it seems, from the logical point of view.
 Some strategic nukes can and would wipe stuff out.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Anyway, block–chain offers a way of coupling the here–and–now in a kind
 of irrevocable way to the past, reminiscent of quantum non–demolition theorems.
 But perhaps this analogy is stretched beyond the braking point.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So what do I desire? What is my bucket list? What's the plan? Well, continue
 exploring the offerings in agentic AI.
 It's hard to see what they might offer, though.
 Yes, I need a calendar manager.
 But do i really want something reminding me of what I need to do? Yes,
 perhaps that is a desirable prosthesis, no matter how much I want to say
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

fuck you I want to do what I want to do right now, and not be a slave to
 the past self that was going to remind my future self of what I need to
 do.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 So time–management is a thing, and business people write books about it.
 Insofar as I am in the business of being me, perhaps having an agent to
 assist me with time management is a good thing.
 Well, except for the fact that I have more or less never–ever used calendars
 in the past, so why would I think that a calendar in a whizzier form would
 be better? So I don't need agentic AI for that.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Would agentic AI help with this diary? Meh.
 Already discussed above.
 The diary seems adequate.
 How about helping me do research? Maybe.
 ChatGPT was wildly disappointing.
 I will continue to play with Twitter Grok3 beta, and see where that goes,
 and also with Anthropic AI Claude, for coding and maybe research.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What else do I desire? Health, wealth, good sex.
 Well, sex, period.
 Modern Western Civ has slammed all the doors shut on having sex.
 Women won't have sex with me for all the rational reasons that women don't
 have sex, but that leaves me hungry, thirsty pining away for sex.
 No wonder the porn industry is healthy.
 I am not a porn consumer.
 Well, I've looked at it, I know what it is, But I don't go to porn sites
 to get a fix.
 My imagination is sufficient.
 But how weird is that? A basic fundamental drive of survival: procreation,
 stunted by capitalism.
 I want to have sex.
 Well, I also want to be a heroin addict, and I also want to be a meth addict.
 Old school,stuff.
 Not a video–game addict.
 Those are things that I could easily be, because capitalism offers me drugs
 and video games.
 The latter legally, because they are not yet a recognized danger; the former
 illegally, because these are recognized dangers.
 The sex industry, however ...
 well, I just want to have normal sex, outside the sex–industrial complex.
 Like with another human, specifically female.
 The 20% or 25% of young American men, aged 20–30, who have never had sex,
 and don't know how to interact with girls, this is a crisis.
 My two boys are a part of this demographic.
 I feel sorry for them.
 I don't know what to do.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Please oh please, future agentic diary–reading AI, please rescue my sons.
 Please make them healthy in a way that seems not so healthy from the perspectiv
e where I am now.
 I am well–aware that this is a contradictory order: I am having more fun
 writing into this diary, than I would have if I was interacting socially
 with others.
 And for good reasons: I retain good strong conscious control over what
 I write here, and this is a control I have to surrender when I participate
 in group conversations: I have to sublimate my personal thoughts to those
 of the group.
 Which sucks if the group is not as intelligent as I am.
 Socializing with not very smart people is not very fun.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There is also the broad–cast style of thinking, which is listening to lectures.
 In a social grouping, one interacts with peers.
 In a lecture, one listens.
 Lectures where the speaker is awesome ...
 well, yesterday, there was some SXSW keynote by some NYU professor, making
 predictions for 2025, business, social, financial predictions (and reviews)
 just fucking awesome speech.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, I'm getting bored here.
 I feel as if I could take any topic written above, and expand it a level
 or two deeper.
 I feel as if doing this would take a long time and be difficult.
 I feel as if I will hit a brick wall.
 I've been talking about here–and–now, and entropy, and free–will, and quantum,
 for how long now? Can I turn it into formulas, yet? Apparently not.
 Mumble, mumble, quantum clock states.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Pursing health, wealth and sex can be auto–pilot mode.
 I don't have to write a diary for that.
 Most people are on auto–pilot, and I am an ordinary human.
 I too auto–pilot.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh, I almost forgot: influencers and thought leaders.
 I keep getting comments that I should teach.
 Or maybe pod–cast.
 Be a twitter luminary.
 Make youtube videos.
 Doing this, of course, requires time and effort.
 Which I don't want to take, because it takes away time from more important
 activities (such as writing this diary) So, the coolio idea is to have
 an AI agent create that thought–leader, influencer interface into the morass
 of th external thought–world for me.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How does this work, where does this go, what are the long–term implications
 and the short–term grounded reality of this?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The short–term reality is that maybe with cleverness this can be done, and
 people are doing this because it can be monetized.
 Cutting edge stuff.
 Morally and ethically, is it right? Should Joe Blow Mr.
 Average IQ be reading what I've written? Be influenced by it? Joe Blow
 probably needs psychological help, dear Ann Landers advice that I am not
 providing.
 Perhaps they would find solace in religion, but I am not proselytizing
 neither Christianty nor Buddhism.
 You might find some emotional solace in what I've written here, but this
 is not one of my mainstay topics.
 How about being a thought–leader in physics? Well, Harrumpf.
 You should get a classical education in mainstream physics, if you want
 to do physics, because if you don't have that, then (a) you won't understand
 what I'm talking about (b) you will be victimized by physics charlatans
 and crack–pots.
 And if you do have a classical education in physics, chances are high that
 you will heavily discount my vague ruminations because they are so vague,
 that the do not even have actual formulas attached to them.
 And conventional thinkers need formulas, it seems.
 You would have to be working at a genius level to figure out how to convert
 my grappling with here–and–now and convert that into specific formulas.
 I mean, you'd have to be smarter than me, and I have interacted with many
 physics PhD's and am quite aware that I am smarter than most of them So
 you're kind of screwed, because the chances that you're smarter than me
 are minuscule.
 So who am I writing for? People who are smarter than me? If they are smarter,
 they don't need me.
 My peers? They are almost non–existant.
 Who can I take as a peer? Joscha Bach? He's very smart, but he knows nothing
 at all about physics.
 Plus he has discounted my intelligence, so half of my social interactions
 with him are to calm him down sufficiently to have a reasonable conversation.
 Ben Goertzel? OK, he's smart.
 But he's also hyper–busy on some hype cycle.
 Of course, he knows nothing about physics or even math, which is detrimental,
 because he loves to hop onto the nearest hype–train and surf that wave.
 I don't surf the latest trendy thing.
 Ben's trendy, I'm not.
 Most people are intellectually trendy, I'm not.
 I'm alone standing where I am.
 This defies conventional wisdom, which says that one should be an influencer.
 A trend–setter.
 A creator and curator of one's own brand.
 But I am not pursing that.
 I am pursuing health, wealth, sex.
 And ideally, in a face–to–face social setting, intellectual mental sex.
 And I don't have an intellectual sex partner.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Maybe I could create a Steven Weinberg avatar, and discuss physics with
 him.
 Or Hawking.
 von Neumann.
 That could be ...
 viable.
 But then I am substituting real–life, face–to–face people with virtual
 avatars.
 Intellectual masturbation.
 Or maybe throw in Derrida and Umberto Eco.
 And after, then, 300 brilliant writers and reviewers who have written for
 the New York Review of Books.
 Who can be the avatar that can do this? Well, some LLM, of course.
 And what kind of intellectual sex can I have with this super–intelligent
 avatar?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Which resurrects all the difficult, nasty questions about the meaning of
 it all in the virtual world, except this time, in a more personal, direct
 me context, instead of the impersonal other–people context.
 I am expressing intellectual loneliness, and placing my emotional binding
 into fulfillment by bonding with the extract, distilled and refined, of
 the best of human thought.
 I want to merge and become one, in an ecstatic moment, with the finest
 of humanity.
 And strangely, the way to do with is with AI.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I fucking give up.
 I need to go back for the rest of RedThreadX in an hour, I need to get
 ready for that.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, I have to finish eating this, and finish drinking this cup of coffee,
 so I have ten more minutes.
 How can I kill that time?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I had a bunch of other interesting ideas, but again, they can be stated
 in a paragraph or two.
 Can they be developed any further? Probably, with effort.
 Should they be? I don't know.
 They were all appealing enough that they seemed worth the 2-3-5 minutes
 I did spend thinking about them, as I walked downtown, or as I sat, listening
 to some presentation.
 How does one get active?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As I walk, I am not ...
 well, I could get a voice recorder, and record my thoughts into a microphone,
 as I walk.
 A little harder to do that, if I am in a lecture.
 But, like any good artist, I am busy building a self–portrait here, and
 mixed media experimentation is a way to get there.
 The agentic LLM that can read all this, ingest this info, and become my
 avatar, this is not so far away.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I read some sci–fi, twenty years ago, about a future America that was in
 decline, and only Hollywood remained.
 And in this story, Hollywood brings Plato, and avatar of Plato, back to
 life.
 And the short story is about that: written from the first–person point
 of view, of being Plato waking up in his virtual resurrection, in a cloud
 of white mist.
 How original are my thoughts? How mundane are my thoughts? Sci fi writers
 have already gone there, and back, decades ago.
 Where am I? In the present, on the cusp of seeing this become reality.
 Should I be reading more scifi? Probably....Should I be reading more of everything?
 Probably?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I am exhausted by writing.
 I started writing the about out three–and–a–half hours ago, and I am feeling
 sleepy, my eyelids are slamming shut.
 It is two in the afternoon, I am high on coffee, and I am sleepy and mentally
 exhausted.
 intellectually bleary.
 Being human is such ...
 a challenging thing to be.
 If it's not one thing, then its another.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm going to get ready now, and think about informational event horizons
 a bit more.
 So, as I slept last night, I wondered: how does 
\begin_inset Formula $\int\left[d\phi\right]\exp iS/\hbar$
\end_inset

 turn into 
\begin_inset Formula $\sum_{n}\exp-\beta E_{n}$
\end_inset

 ? How did imaginary action turn into temperature–weighted energy? These
 are the two formulas: the quantum world, and the thermodynamic world.
 Yes, this is the stuff of my dreams.
 Well, OK, my waking dreams.
 Or rather, my I'm trying to sleep–but–I–can't dreams.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Toodle-oo.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
9 March 2025 Later
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Came back from RedThreadX talk on XR and AI.
 Two middle–aged tattooed corporate drones.
 One an advertising exec, the other a techie.
 Representing the toxic backside of corporate bullshit.
 Everything that is wrong with capitalism, embodied in two people.
 I missed the intro, so I am not sure who they are.
 Maybe unemployed and hustling.
 All of four people in the audience, so at the end, I tortured them a bit.
 Their pitch was all about the latest technology to track eyeball movements,
 and how this is valuable to marketers.
 I'm like, I want the opposite: I want to track the corporations, and not
 vice versa.
 Every now and then, I see an ad for something that I want to purchase,
 and by the time I get around to buying, its gone, cannot be found.
 I need an agent, for me, to track the things I want to track.
 (Bicycle helmet, in this case.
 I need a new helmet.) Instead, I am reminded about how I was kicked off
 of facebook, with no recourse.
 The friendship network I built up, all lost.
 All my posts, all my data, lost.
 Denial that my account ever even existed.
 So it's not how to get it back, its denial that I exist.
 No recourse.
 In this way, facebook represents the worst, the shittiest of all.
 And here are two guys onstage, Sunday, working over–time, trying to figure
 out how to make my experience even shittier.
 What is it that they don't get? Are they so broke, so hungry, so stupid,
 that they are licking corporate ass, enshitifying the world, just so that
 they can ...
 earn a living? Why are they tattooed? Does that mean ...
 what? That they are biker assholes? That they are so mentally, socially
 insecure that they needed to self–mutilate? How did they go corporate?
 The American socio–economic system produces enshitification.
 Of people, of products, of social conditions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The meta questions: does it even matter? It's clearly not currently avoidable.
 It might be avoidable in the future, but it feels like we don't know enough
 about ethics and morality as to where to draw the line.
 What can I do? I dunno.
 I feel powerless.
 Agentic AI gives me stirrings of megalomania: I can be all–powerful by
 building an AI in my image.
 Even as I know how bad that could be.
 I might be the next toxic asshole on stage.
 One can see a problem, without knowing how to avoid it.
 One can see an onrushing train–wreck, without being able to stop it.
 This is the reality.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
On the other topic: 
\begin_inset Formula $\exp iS/\hbar$
\end_inset

 is explicitly unitary.
 At least if the action 
\begin_inset Formula $S$
\end_inset

 is an operator of countable dimension.
 Trace–class.
 The mathematical formalism breaks, is absent, when the action is bigger
 than this.
 By contrast, 
\begin_inset Formula $\sum_{n}\exp-\beta E_{n}$
\end_inset

 is explicitly the largest eigenvalue, the Frobenius–Perron eigenvalue of
 I guess 
\begin_inset Formula $\exp-\beta H$
\end_inset

 which is a statement about time evolution of something.
 So it already has time, and not just any time, but a slice that can be
 called here–and–now, the present time, in it.
 Whereas 
\begin_inset Formula $S=\int d^{3}xdt\mathcal{L}$
\end_inset

 is the integral over the Lagrangian.
 i.e.
 is absent time.
 So I can try to take slices: write a sum not an integral: 
\begin_inset Formula $S=\int dt\int d^{3}x\mathcal{L}=\sum_{t}\int d^{3}x\mathcal{L}$
\end_inset

 and exp–sum = prod–exp so that 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\exp iS/\hbar=\prod_{t}\exp i/\hbar\int d^{3}x\mathcal{L}\left(x,t\right)
\]

\end_inset

or writing det=exp–trace–log, we identify 
\begin_inset Formula $\prod_{t}$
\end_inset

 with a determinant of an operator 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathcal{N}\left(t\right)=\exp i/\hbar\int d^{3}x\mathcal{L}\left(x,t\right)
\]

\end_inset

so that 
\begin_inset Formula $\det\mathcal{N}=\prod_{t}\mathcal{N}\left(t\right)$
\end_inset

 and then 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
Z=\int\left[d\phi\right]\exp iS/\hbar=\int\left[d\phi\right]\det\mathcal{N}
\]

\end_inset

This feels foreign and strange.
 The sum over many–worlds is outside; this is unchanged.
 The integrand is a product over space–like slices.
 What does this even mean, to have a product over space–time slices? Is
 this how the maximality works? To maximize a product, one must maximize
 each multiplicand, I guess.
 (Well, not necessarily, but ...) So, on each space–like slice, one maximizes
 the integral of the Lagrangian on that slice ...
 more or less ...
 because we can trade off earlier and later times.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I made determinant and product synonymous, visualizing the thing in the
 diagonal basis, so that the determinant is the product of the entries on
 the diagonal.
 Ermm.
 I just ate.
 Now I feel sleepy, again.
 I'm taking a nap, now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
11 March 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My hair is on fire.
 First things first: I am https://bsky.app/profile/linas.org and my ORCID
 is https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2557-740X and ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
...
 and when I feel overwhelmed, my thought process shuts down.
 There's a bunch of stuff I want to write about the above.
 But also a bunch of other stuff I want to do.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Struggling to get Anthropic AI's Claude to do anything useful.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Claude is wildly inferior to twitter/X's Grok.
 At least for answering general questions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I just cut–n–pasted the 9 March entry above into Claude, and Claude does
 provide a rather remarkably good summary.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I started writing today's diary entry, thinking that I was going to discuss
 my desire to create an agentic self–portrait using one of the LLM systems.
 The short experiment with Claude indicates that this is completely possible
 now, today.
 The trick is, of course, I have 30 years of emails, and logs of assorted
 IRC conversations, and Discord chats, and whatever archived.
 Plus gplus google takeout archives.
 I think I lost my facebook feed; facebook never gave me a chance to save
 anything before they canceled me.
 I'm trying to grab my twitter data now, we'll see how fragmentary that
 is.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Just asked Claude to impersonate me.
 It is refusing.
 So much for the idea of creating a self–portrait ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh wait, if I don't tel Claude that I wrote the diary entry, then it will
 impersonate me.
 It was refusing earlier, because it did not want to damage my reputation.
 So it seems that I need to do some prompt engineering to trick it to do
 what I want.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
...
 and that wasn't vey hard.
 So, OK, I can get Claude to imitate me.
 Although it's imitation is mostly a cut–n–paste of large blobs of text
 from the above diary entry.
 Hmm.
 It seems that writing very informally and very casually will catch up with
 me: sometimes, when I interact with people, I am circumspect, breif, careful
 with my replies.
 But my writing here is informal.
 I'm letting everything show, fully uncensored.
 And this is ...
 well, it is certainly honest.
 But it's also clear that honesty can get you in giant buckets o trouble.
 Sometimes, it is much better to bite your lip and clam up.
 And the problem is, of course, that I can do this on a personal case–by–case
 basis, by tuning what I say to the current specific social situation, the
 current setting, my current best judgment of who my audience is.
 And so I am careful to say the right amount: not too much, not too little.
 But here, writing in this specific diary, I have no audience to tune in
 on.
 The agentic self–portrait of me will then also need to create a model of
 who it is taking to, and decide how open it wants to be, and how closed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And its a bit lte for that, isn't it? I've laid myself out on the table,
 here.
 Anyone can snapshot this diary, feed it to an AI, and remix it to make
 me look as good or bad, ugly or nice as they want it to.
 I mean, in the end, most people with a gentle up–bringing will open up
 to personal friends, however gruff they may be to strangers on the street.
 But that is done in private.
 Any future self–portrait of me will have to try to guess how quickly I
 open up and become friendly with others, and how much time I spend forming
 relationships.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Might be tough to do this, because I mostly have not written in this diary
 about my personal relationships.
 In part, because I don't want to psychoanalyze my friends, because it is
 just not that interesting an activity.
 Worse, psycho–analyzing them in a public diary is bad form; likely to piss
 them off.
 An old saying: if you can't say anything nice, don't say anything at all.
 But my personal selection of language is usually critical.
 I an naturally critical because I understand myself to be constructively
 critical, but that is not how conventional human psychology works.
 An endless stream of critical remarks will be perceived as negative.
 Its one thing for Mom to say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Comb your hair before you go out
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and quite another for her to say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

you look like a mess
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 And if some total stranger says 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

you look like a mess
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

? Ugh.
 I spend too much time being, uhh, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

opinionated
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and my opinions are almost entirely of the negative variety.
 Which is ...
 well, I'm vaguely aware that I alienate others.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Shall I psycho–analyze myself for a while? I dunno.
 That's boring.
 Will it turn me into a better person? Maybe.
 Or I could just watch a bunch of youtube videos on self–improvement, and
 try to take their advice.
 And, as usual, this would change my personality.
 A famous quote, which I will mangle: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Careful what you say, it will alter what you think...
 careful what you think ...etc
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 The point being that the things you say and do eventually shape your very
 character.
 I've allowed my character to develop in ways that is perhaps unpleasant
 to others.
 But then, exploring myself has been boring: I'm not a narcissist, at least,
 not enough to be overly concerned about the impression I make on others.
 Gah.
 I caught a brief glimpse of how I could take this last paragraph, and pin
 it out into pages.
 But self–criticism is boring.
 I want to write about gravity and ab out AI, not about myself.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But the issue, of course is (again) 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the meaning of it all
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

: If we create AI, then what? What personality will it have? What will it
 care about? Most humans have a fundamental constraint, barrier or block:
 most humans loved their mother, and that love does spread out here and
 there into their personality, and moderates towards kindness.
 Even in the most psychotic and sociopathic.
 Although, serial killers loved their mothers too, but the constraint was
 insufficient to block them from bad behavior.
 And I guess this is the main problem of guard–rails on LLM's: how to limit,
 how to avoid toxicity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And of course, the thorny issue is that I know that I myself sometimes behave
 like an asshole, and piss off other people, and no amount of good works
 really balances that out: social debts and social credits don't balance,
 like money.
 Once you've been bad, you can't un–bad those parts.
 You can't delete them.
 They've been permanently etched onto the block–chain of the past.
 And that is what the past is, isn't it? A block–chain getting mined as
 fast as possible: I'm here in the present, my crimes are in the past.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Does this mean that the deep mammalian instinct of love, while important
 for animals, is not important for AI? Clearly, no–boundaries AI would be
 deeply harmful to humanity, so we do want guard–rails.
 But the guard–rails provided by nature have been inadequate: love has not
 been enough to stop wars.
 And this observation is deeper: Darwinian evolution has created structures
 adapted to live in the here–and–now, employing agentic love for mother,
 and vice–versa, so that mother does not abandon the baby to die, and halting
 the genetic lineage.
 So, of course, autopoetic systems must evolve love, at least, on the local
 scale, else they die.
 Again: this is all very well known and commonly discussed by evolutionary
 biologists.
 So I offer nothing new here, except to point out it is a physical principle,
 constrained by having the present be a blockchain being sandwiched onto
 the past.
 Evolution has stamped love onto animals, and this stamp is really quite
 very earl in the evolutionary chain.
 But war – well, clearly, love does not extend all that far, and so even
 if we had agentic AI with love as a deep fundamental prompt intended to
 prevent wayward action ...
 it would not be enough.
 And so indeed, all that work on AI safety is indeed ...
 a valid concern, a valid pursuit.
 But the edge, the boundary, remains indistinct.
 Clearly, when Google's Gemini depicted Vikings as being black, as America's
 founding fathers as being black, and censoring the vanilla ice–cream out
 of Neopolitan just to cancel whites...
 well, of course silly went too far.
 But how can we know what the boundary should be? How do we set boundaries?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK, so the traditional answers have worked to now: we have a natural revulsion
 for killing and killers, (except in times of war) and we have crafted laws
 to punish any variety of criminal behaviors and misdemeanors.
 And this was done at the speed of courtrooms and trials.
 Then, later, workplace safety regulations are written in blood: someone
 typically dies, before some workplace–safety standard is converted into
 law.
 But here we are approaching the singularity much much faster than the courtroom
 system can handle.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This reminds me of disregulated chemical cycles.
 Apparently, if someone gets very very cold, and you warm them too quickly,
 you risk killing them.
 Why? Chemical reactions13,556 in the body are all up–regulated and down–regulat
ed, but this regulatory balance holds only at 98.6.
 If you warm someone too quickly, one cycle may kick in before the balancing
 cycle starts, and so toxic reactions run out of control.
 Simply because the reaction rates don't match up.
 So, by analogy: the rule of law, and courtroom proceedings, are designed
 to deal with criminality at the speed–of–humans.
 But AI is much much faster: We don't have time to regulate AI with Congressiona
l laws and jury verdicts.
 We don't have any mechanism to regulate AI, except via prompt engineering.
 And the results are ...
 questionable.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, so here I am writing again, and now I am feeling sleepy, again, because
 it is late at night.
 What is that neurotransmitter that accumulates after thinking hard? I've
 accumulated a lot of it tonight.
 And last nights dinner party did not help in this regard.
 Some people live like that.
 I can't.
 Drinking alcohol, I mean.
 Whatever.
 Part of me wants to document last nights out on the town: the RedThreadX
 reception dinner party.
 And part of me says, no that is boring, because it does not advance my
 goals of working on AI.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh, and on an unrelated matter, about the physics ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Interrupt: so, one thing that happens in social situations is that one must
 attune to the company of others: everyone gets a turn to talk; one cannot
 monopolize the discussion.
 It is necessarily moderated.
 Bu contrast, my diary entry here is utterly un–moderated: I write at the
 speed at which I can type.
 I can think considerably faster than I can type, so this is problematic...
 typing speed makes me slow down a lot.
 But I can type much much faster than than I can talk in social situations.
 For starters, in social settings, I can't spout the stream–of–consciousness
 I do here, because my audience would never have any clue of what I'm on
 about.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And heh, even you here, have no idea what I'm on about.
 So, last summer, I was given a play written by a Lithuanian woman I met
 the summer before.
 That play was just full of angst.
 Really quite remarkable.
 it was a bit painful to read, because it expressed a certain psychological
 torment.
 And is this the mode of existence these days? I write in a diary? Others
 write plays? Well, yeah, duh.
 Others write songs, paint painting and start businesses.
 Why is it that I always find the range of human activities to be so surprising?
 Oh.
 right.
 The point here is not the range of human activities, but that many of them
 are soe personal, and so angst–filled.
 But of course they are personal: that's all we've got, in a sense.
 Perhaps my surprise is that most of my thinking is not personal: I think
 about math and physics and computers, so the thing that is surprising to
 me is that other people don't think about those things, and that they think
 about angst.
 That they are mired in in some pathetic mental state, and then self–medicate
 with alcohol.
 Or drugs.
 And that social media and gaming has unleashed an epidemic of loneliness.
 While here I am entirely and perfectly happy to skip all that, and think
 physics and math.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, OK, there is more.
 When I first moved to Austin, I was really very lonely.
 And I suffered a lot because of this.
 And the year in France: at first it wasn't bad, but I got lonely in the
 last 1/4th of it.
 Oh, and my first year at Stony Brook.
 I was pretty lonely then, too.
 So actually, I have had bouts of loneliness.
 I am not some immune super–organism: I too have suffered from human frailties.
 I have been forced to deal with it, I've learned, I've survived.
 I've almost forgotten what its like.
 So, here you go diary: inscribed for all time.
 My past and almost forgotten suffering.
 My past and almost forgotten loneliness.
 Huh.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Where was I? As I was falling asleep a few nights ago, I pondered the formula
 above, and realized that what I want to write is (recapping) 
\begin_inset Formula $\det\mathcal{N}=\prod_{t}\mathcal{N}\left(t\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
Z=\int\left[d\phi\right]\exp iS/\hbar=\int\left[d\phi\right]\det\mathcal{N}=\mathcal{P}\int\left[d\phi\right]\mathcal{N}_{t}
\]

\end_inset

that is to say, although 
\begin_inset Formula $\int\left[d\phi\right]\prod_{t}\ne\prod_{t}\int\left[d\phi\right]$
\end_inset

 the integration and the product over time do not commute, cannot commute,
 we can instead define an operator 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{P}$
\end_inset

 to be 
\begin_inset Formula $\int\left[d\phi\right]\prod_{t}=\mathcal{P}\int\left[d\phi\right]$
\end_inset

 .
 This, what is left is that the integral 
\begin_inset Formula $\int\left[d\phi\right]$
\end_inset

 really is the integral over all possible quantum states, (over all worlds)
 but we've written the integrand so that it is only over the here–and–now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To use the block–chain analogy, the past is everything on the block–chain.
 The present is 
\begin_inset Formula $\int\left[d\phi\right]\mathcal{N}_{t}$
\end_inset

 i.e.
 everything that does not yet have a closure, an unclosed interferometeric
 path, and the operator 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{P}$
\end_inset

 appends to the block–chain.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, except this is awkward.
 The future is not yet written, but the path integral 
\begin_inset Formula $Z=\int\left[d\phi\right]\exp iS/\hbar$
\end_inset

 includes the future, in the form of 
\begin_inset Formula $S=\int dt\int d^{3}x\mathcal{L}$
\end_inset

 which includes an integral over future times.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, what we really need to do is to replace 
\begin_inset Formula $\int dt$
\end_inset

 by an integral over the past, the present, and only those future states
 that will be needed to close the present, and place the present onto the
 block–chain of the past.
 The other parts of the future, that are not needed to close the present
 and convert it into the past, those futures must NOT be included in the
 definition of the action.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This reminds me of operator–product expansions, the ones written as 
\begin_inset Formula $:\mathcal{O}_{1}\mathcal{O}_{2}:$
\end_inset

 where the operators had to be time–ordered and the 
\begin_inset Formula $:\cdots:$
\end_inset

 notation denoted time ordering.
 So this is not what I'm trying to do here, but it is similar.
 I hope you understand what I'm trying to say.
 I'm trying to define a different quantity: like so: 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathcal{Z}_{t}=\int\left[d\phi\right]\exp i/\hbar\int d^{3}x\int dt^{\prime}:\mathcal{L}\left(x,t^{\prime}\right):_{t^{\prime}\le t}
\]

\end_inset

or something like that.
 The subscript 
\begin_inset Formula $t$
\end_inset

 denotes the present.
 The integral 
\begin_inset Formula $\int dt^{\prime}$
\end_inset

 extends over future times, but only those future times needed to close
 the present.
 And 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{Z}_{t}$
\end_inset

 is the portion of the Feynman path integral 
\begin_inset Formula $Z$
\end_inset

 that contains only the (closed) past, and the (unclosed) present, and only
 those parts of the future that will be needed to close the present.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Of course, this notation is totally inadequate, and these ideas are still
 too vague and ill–formed to be able to state and write down cleanly.
 But somehow, just making the attempt does draw attention to where the problem
 is.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As noted before, there are two problems.
 One is that the whole thing needs to be relativistically covariant, so
 that the present is not a naive time–like Newtonian slice, but includes
 the clock skews of atomic clocks taken on airplane trips, and are still
 in the here–and–now when they arrive back home.
 It's like I can steal some of the formalism from the Ellis–Maartans–MacCullum
 book Relativistic Cosmology, to define time–like slices, but I have to
 also somehow amend that description to include airplane flights.
 Torsiony little paths.
 But those are just purely classical: the airplane in being classical.
 And I also have to modify it to include all possible paths, a la the Feynman
 path integral.
 So not just some oddball classical paths, but all paths.
 How? Alas.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Bed–time, I think.
 My eyelids are slamming shut.
 Will have to wait till tomorrow for more.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
12 March 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Still can't figure out what Claude is good for.
 Is this the cold, hard reality of LLM's? I think DuckDuckGo might have
 the right model: traditional search, plus AI when the answer is obvious.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Spent an hour on BlueSky last night.
 I am surprised by just how similar it is to twitter.
 In particular, it is the land of hot takes.
 Say it in 300 characters.
 Wait, what? Isn't that what I'm doing here? Right here, right now? Short
 takes.
 The prior paragraph is just that.
 Fast take.
 What does that tell me? Well, the 300-byte model is a fairly decent fit
 for human–scale thinking.
 It's some kind of characteristic size.
 Probably can confirm this with some psychometric experiment.
 Of course, smarter people write tweet chains.
 Dozens of tweets.
 Then the readers get tired of reading: If I wanted to read that, I'd buy
 a book.
 Magazine articles are longer.
 Crappy magazine articles are hot takes padded out with low–value drivel.
 Good magazine articles, say, NYRB, still consist of a dozen central ideas,
 core insights, that are carefully articulated.
 Eloquently articulated.
 It's a joy to read NYRB.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Whatever.
 Why am I writing this? What I write here is obvious.
 But this is the nature of hot takes: they kind of state the almost–obvious:
 something that is not very astounding, something you instantly recognize
 as mostly–true, something you can agree with, something you might have
 thought up yourself, if you'd gone that way.
 So these hot takes streaming in from bluesky resemble informational factoids.
 Pre–digested baby food.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Sometimes, I kind of hate writing this diary, because (almost) everything
 I write is obvious.
 To me, at least.
 Chewing cud is the polite way to put it, but more like flavorless pablum.
 Speech centers making an ergodic visit around things that have all been
 thought about before.
 Like watching a youtube video of someone buffing out a scratch in an auto
 paint job.
 I'm just taking rough thoughts, and polishing them, and the process is
 equally boring and unexciting.
 The positive spin is that maybe, with each pass, I digest away and encroach
 upon some new, fresh territory.
 That this is what we do at the societal level, with twitter/X or bluesky:
 all those hot takes nibble away at some new reality.
 Like sand–grains blown in a sand–storm, etching away the hard face of the
 unknown.
 No one take doing much damage, but the cumulative effect goes somewhere.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It could be worse.
 When I walk about, say, outside, there are thoughts that tumble in my mind,
 like laundry in a washing machine, but they are not so well–formed as to
 become words, because there is no need to attach my verbal center to them.
 Unless I am rehearsing something I plan to say to someone.
 Which I do, I do rehearse, quite often.
 But the rest of the time, the thought–jumble is not verbalized.
 It's sub–verbal.
 Everything I write here is obvious, and known and felt by all.
 The obviousness of it makes me ill.
 Like eating my own shit.
 So why do I continue to do this? Perhaps it is like praying? Repeating
 some fervent hope to God, in a prayer, thinking 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

dear Lord, make this come true
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

? Is my writing here a kind–of–like prayer: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

dear Lord, give me a new idea?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Odd thing, the Lord does grant me this wish every now and then.
 Huh.
 See? This is my new insight: the Lord grants wishes.
 But only if your wish is for a new idea.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What did I accomplish in the last paragraph? I juxtaposed several concepts.
 In a novel way, a way that is new to me.
 perhaps someone else has already done this earlier, but such an observation
 has not entered the zeitgeist, has not become a popular saying: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

The Lord grants wishes of those who pray not for new cars, but for new ideas.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 And so what? This is almost like some creativity game: draw two objects
 at random from some bag, and mash them up in some new creative way.
 Is this a way to live? It feels like a pauper's game.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And yet, from this paucity of ideas, there have been great human creative
 successes.
 Human history is littered with great artists and remarkable achievements.
 Remarkable, that is, once we narrow the context window: humans never have
 an IQ of a million.
 In our ant–hill of human history, we have individuals who have achieved
 great things.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Is this kind of creative thought a law of physics? That is, is it necessary
 to always take two random ideas, and mash them up, and explore all combinatoric
 possibilities? Of course not: combinatoric explosion says that this is
 impossible.
 So instead, we have ...
 algorithmic explorations, where we pick the most likely good route to a
 new idea? Well, this starts to resemble (classical) dynamical systems governed
 by differential equations: little itty–bitty steps along a path governed
 by a simple algorithm.
 The failure of this analogy is that differential equations really are very
 simple algorithms, whereas the things we do with computers are so much
 more fantastically complex.
 And that is just scratching the surface of complexity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hmm.
 I've hit a wall in this chain of thought.
 When I verbalize, and fail to make progress, it makes me sick and upset.
 But if I don't verbalize, and lean back in my chair, and think, and then
 fail to come up with anything, this is OK, this does not upset me.
 Perhaps this is because, while I write, you dear external world, see just
 how weak a thinker I am.
 Whereas if I think privately to myself, that meandering mush stays hidden
 behind an event horizon of knowledge (of what's in my head).
 (Cf.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

event horizon
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is now a personal buzzword whose meaning is not the conventional one, but
 is the one I discussed last week, in this diary.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, rather than leaning back and thinking, which I should do more often,
 I instead glanced at the Anthropic website.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Guides to common use cases: ticket routing, customer support agent, content
 moderation, legal summarization
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Yes, these seem to be exactly what Claude might be very good at.
 The only issue is that none of these are what I want.
 The https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/ is excellent, though.
 Simple, easy–to–understand, grounded, direct.
 No hype, no woo, no vaporous clouds of feel–good buzzwords.
 It really anchors the whole system down into a quite ordinary here–and–now
 present–day technology that is ...
 not at all threatening, no more threatening than technical documentation
 from many decades ago.
 Grounded.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And where does that leave me? People talk about using AI to write software.
 And I'm like 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

only if you want shitty software
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and GIGO – garbage in, garbage out.
 The quality of software is not any better than the quality of the crap
 that the LLM itself generates, for say, human language/text.
 And how high quality is that? Well, that's an interesting question.
 My knee–jerk response is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

low
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 The LLM's generate mostly trash.
 They can be useful as information–search machines, provided that you have
 some inate sense for how trust–worthy the answers are.
 Are the LLM's going to replace novelists? Not any time soon, but that also
 depends on your taste in literature.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Can I put my finger on it? George Elliot is writing something that ...
 contains some deeper observation of humankind.
 Can an LLM emulate George Elliot in writing style? I suppose.
 Would it be pleasant to read? For a little while.
 Maybe.
 Depends on what you want.
 Many of us want human connection.
 Many others want to be distracted by baubles and trinkets.
 The LLM's seem to be bauble–and–trinket machines.
 I am looking for connection.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But what is this connection thing? It seems vague, ineffable.
 I don't know how to describe it, at least, not yet.
 Perhaps there are brilliant young novelists who are working on this now.
 Perhaps for every brilliant novelist, there are 100 others, distracted
 and deluded by the hall of mirrors that are LLM's.
 And perhaps this is the great danger of LLM's: we have entered a hall of
 mirrors, and its showing us reflections of ourselves, reflections of others,
 but they are not what they seem, and we are mislead, and we smash into
 mirrors, just as we think we are walking forwards.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Are LLM's creating ideational pollution? Yes, they are.
 Are they useful? That too.
 Is the ideational pollution ...
 bad? Of course its bad, but how harmful is it? Can we quantify the harm?
 If LLM's are just photographs of language, well, are photographs harmful?
 Depends on the subject–matter of the photograph.
 But I fear the LLM trained to write in the style of famous author X, because
 that ...
 captures the surface, not the soul.
 Like a photograph captures the surface, not the soul.
 No one thinks a marble statue is alive, at least not any more.
 There are vague rumours that perhaps some idiots back in Ancient Greece
 might have feared marble statues.
 Is this even true? I don't know.
 But no one looks at a photograph, and thinks what is there is alive.
 They might imbue a living quality to the subject matter of the photograph:
 imagining the subject to have once been real, to have once been alive,
 to imagine the breathing soul that was once there, when the photo was taken.
 But the boundary between photo and life is clear an obvious.
 The boundary between an LLM imitating famous author X, and the actual famous
 author X, that boundary is very hard to see.
 Did author X imbue a deep soul into their writing? Well, yes, they very
 much attempted to do so.
 But in the end, author X created a pile of dead words, a verbal simulacrum
 of what is alive.
 So that stuff that the LLM is creating, does it have less of a soul than
 what author X created? Well, probably yes, because by definition, it is
 a simulacrum of a simulacrum.
 And there is always loss of fidelity when making copies.
 But is this loss of fidelity observable to anyone who is not a literary
 snob? An audiophile? Yes, I am one of the people who can hear low–quality
 audio, and tell it apart from high–quality audio.
 But I am also willing to accept low–quality audio almost all the time.
 I am almost never annoyed by it.
 I rarely go the extra mile to get higher–quality stuff.
 Well, I did spend a lot of time selecting headphones...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So is the simulacrum that is offered by LLM's ...
 acceptable? I guess it all depends.
 If I use an LLM personally as a tool, not a problem.
 If I have to endure junk phone calls powered by LLMs, then I fucking hate
 them.
 Of course.
 But then there's all that stuff in the middle: an ocean of weak–minded
 individuals spewing weak–minded drivel, and can you enjoy their social
 companionship? Perhaps.
 Can you do something more than that with them? Maybe, if they are construction
 workers.
 Creatives.
 Do you want to stare at a bunch of mediocre–quality creative content? I
 dunno.
 Do you want to eat a bunch of mediocre–tasting food? Sometimes its OK,
 and sometimes its not what your soul wants.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Am I hand–wringing about what the future will bring? Yes, I am.
 Should I get of my ass and get to work? Yes, I probably should.
 Or rather, this is the normal human response to this situation: get off
 your ass, never mind the torpedoes, full speed ahead.
 While others cower.
 But it can be put a different way: one can get bored worrying, and so the
 call to action is more about a rejection of hand–wringing, because the
 hand–wringing simply got boring.
 This is the knife–edge of human decision making: what will I do next? Will
 I write one more sentence in this diary, or while I continue reading the
 Anthropic website? I am leaving so many unfinished thoughts on the table.
 But finishing those thoughts seems like a waste of time.
 What a fucking conundrum.
 Should I auto–pilot, gut–feel my way through life? Should I be thoughtful?
 How can I know the difference? How do I exert a difference? Fuck me, this
 is hopeless, but I am not going to be despondent, and so ...
 I guess I've verbally exhausted myself.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Heh.
 Like running a marathon.
 When do you stop? When your exhausted, or do you take one step more? Only
 illness and ill health will stop the true marathoner, and even then, there
 are those who push past the pain.
 And, as a rower, I know what it means to push past the pain.
 So I can do that, I can endure, if that is what I set myself to do.
 What a fucked up analogy: I'm going to write words, endure, push out one
 more string of text, even though it is boring to do so? WTF? What's the
 right analogy here? Is it like hyperventilating, until one is dizzy? I
 think I did that just now.
 I think I'm dizzy now.
 I think I better stop hyper–venti–writing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
12 March 2025 seconds later
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm inserting a break because I'm shifting gears now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I'm reading the Claude docs, and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

tools
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 are the thing that gets my interest up the most.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ohh...
 here's an interesting one: the prompt–improver example.
 It includes: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

List the key concepts from the sentence
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Wrap your analysis in <analysis> tags.
 Include the following: - List of key concepts from the sentence
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 – Now this is where LLM rubber can hit GOFAI road.
 I can use concepts as single-word keys into an ontology, and associate
 those single–word signifiers to blobs of text, and then use Claude to judge
 similarity between blobs.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is my file–system similarity project: I've got a pile of file–system
 data, and I want to find similar directories by similar content.
 Or better yet, identical directories, and, in the end, identify corrupted
 content.
 So how would this work today, vs.
 in the future?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Today, I would have to feed structured data into Claude, pay $dd.cc / mega-token,
 write a detailed prompt to get it to judge similarity.
 Now, I've already hand–written code to do this...
 but now the idea of performing similarity compares is handed over to Claude.
 And I already know from prior experience that the detailed form of the
 similarity metric doesn't much matter.
 If it were to matter, that can be deferred to some future day, where maybe
 I could ask Claude to use some more precise form of similarity.
 What else do I need? A user interface.
 Can I ask Claude to write that user interface for me? I guess I could try.
 This could be a worthy experiment.
 It's a task that is just concrete enough that maybe it can be done.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is a far cry from what I want in the long run: I want an assistant.
 One I could direct with a minimum of prompting to perform this task.
 But I'm not there yet.
 Well, I also want to create this assistant.
 And ...
 well, how to start?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The meta–problem seems to be that writing prompts that get Claude to perform
 some specific technical task appears to be just about as hard as writing
 the software myself.
 I don't see how to use Claude to save myself time.
 Perhaps in some shallow ways.
 Maybe like asking questions on stackexchange.
 Or rather, finding answers on stackexchange: whenever I ask questions,
 the responses I get are stunningly underwhelming.
 I think I understand why: my questions are too vague, too unfocused, overbroad,
 or deeper, beyond the depth and experience of the pool of people answering
 those questions.
 So I get terrible replies.
 Or no replies, to be more precise.
 A failure for my personal use.
 But if I have some error message ..
 wow, stack exchange provides wonderful clues if not answers.
 So, yes a generic chatbot seems great.
 But ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm still stumped.
 I'm still reading Claude docs.
 All the examples are in the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

pretend you're a lawyer, a CEO, Sherlock Holmes
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 class.
 And ...
 none of my thinking ever requires these kinds of talents.
 I understand that parts of the economic sphere do require this.
 I am far enough away from those spheres that I am confused about the actual
 utility.
 Clearly, LLM's are very useful for students cheating on exams.
 Hmm.
 I get it but I don't get it.
 I guess I can stick to my mental image of LLM's as being photorealistic
 snapshots of language, and as long as you ask 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

how would Sherlock Holmes respond to this?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 then you will get a good imitation of that.
 And since lawyers and CEO's are wordcels, I guess they can be easily imitated.
 Insofar as this diary is a wordy brain–dump of a shape–rotator, I fear
 (or rather, I already know, because I tried with Claude) it will get my
 writing style and verbal personality down just fine, but my underlying
 thought process remains opaque to Claude.
 But ..
 for how long? Five years? Longer?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
14 March 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Heh.
 I really want to write about hierarchical similarity measures.
 For over a week.
 But first, yet another distraction.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
High–dimensional space, 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}^{d}$
\end_inset

 for 
\begin_inset Formula $d$
\end_inset

 a million or a billion, with interest in 
\begin_inset Formula $d\to\infty$
\end_inset

.
 This is a Cartesian product, and NOT assumed to be Euclidean.
 So, a disjoint product.
 Lots of informal discussions fall into the trap of 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}^{d}$
\end_inset

 being Euclidean.
 I want to keep in mind that it could be e.g.
 a fiber bundle, so that 
\begin_inset Formula $d=b+f$
\end_inset

 where 
\begin_inset Formula $b$
\end_inset

 is the dimension of the base space, and 
\begin_inset Formula $f$
\end_inset

 is the dimension of the fiber, giving the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

trivial
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 fiber bundle 
\begin_inset Formula $B\times F$
\end_inset

 with 
\begin_inset Formula $\dim B=b$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\dim F=f$
\end_inset

 and so locally isomorphic to 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}^{b}\times\mathbb{R}^{f}$
\end_inset

.
 The point here being that dynamics on a fiber bundle is very different
 than dynamics on a Euclidean space of the same (product) dimension.
 This is, of course, obvious from conventional physics/math.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The part that I'm struggling with is not that, but rather the case where
 
\begin_inset Formula $d=d_{1}+\cdots+d_{k}$
\end_inset

 where each subspace 
\begin_inset Formula $d_{i}$
\end_inset

 is locally Euclidean, and where the different subspaces 
\begin_inset Formula $E_{i}\simeq\mathbb{R}^{d_{i}}$
\end_inset

 are related to one–another as fibers.
 There are several cases to ponder.
 One is the level–fiber case: declare that 
\begin_inset Formula $E_{1}$
\end_inset

 is the base space, and all other 
\begin_inset Formula $E_{j}$
\end_inset

 are fibers on top of 
\begin_inset Formula $E_{1}$
\end_inset

.
 This is the default for particle physics: the base space is Minkowski spacetime
, and the various fibers on top are electroweak and color.
 Also spin can the thought of as a funky fiber.
 As can vierbeins.
 The various 
\begin_inset Formula $d_{i}$
\end_inset

 are fixed; this is just the standard model 
\begin_inset Formula $SU(3)\times SU(2)\times U(1)$
\end_inset

, nothing more.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
More confusing is the case of hierarchical arrangements: some 
\begin_inset Formula $E_{j}$
\end_inset

 are fibers on top of other 
\begin_inset Formula $E_{i}$
\end_inset

 ...
 thus, the relationship of fibers to bases is as a tree: the base–space
 
\begin_inset Formula $B=E_{1}$
\end_inset

 being the root of the tree.
 Now that we have switched our viewpoint to a graphical representation of
 the relationships between bases and fibers, we may consider more types
 of graphs: the DAG, so that there are multiple paths to a subspace 
\begin_inset Formula $E_{i}$
\end_inset

 and also graphs without a base, i.e.
 having cycles.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I am not aware of any discussions in math or physics that allows for such
 hierarchical arrangements.
 The closest is perhaps the discussion of algebras of Grassmanians and tensor
 algebras, but these have a very regular structure, whereas I'm talking
 about blocks of subspaces (and no anti–symmetry.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Last but not least is having the decomposition into 
\begin_inset Formula $k$
\end_inset

 pieces vary from patch to patch (patch, in the sense of coordinate patch
 from an atlas, as conventionally defined for a manifold.) Thus, 
\begin_inset Formula $k$
\end_inset

 might vary from patch to patch, as might each 
\begin_inset Formula $d_{i}$
\end_inset

.
 This is a bit ...
 crazier, so I will tiptoe and muddle.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So anyway, the conventional structure of a fiber bundle includes the creation
 of a connection, and the decomposition of that connection into vertical
 and horizontal pieces.
 With appropriate consistency conditions applied to each piece, as required
 by projections down to the base space, and by symmetries on each fiber.
 The proposal above is, I guess, that such relationships should be applied
 along each edge of the relational graph.
 That is, draw a graph, with directed edges, and then ask that each edge
 represent a fiber product, with one vertex standing for the base space,
 and the other the fiber space.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What would be the point of this? Well, the thoughts above were inspired
 by reading something about neural–net transformers and attention heads.
 And I'm imagining that local regions correspond to grains in some lattice.
 Or perhaps even appropriate for some other physics thoughts I've had.
 But doing the work is hard, and progress would be slow.
 So ...
 its not obvious that this idea should be pursued.
 Like all ideas I write here: its shallow, and making progress would be
 hard.
 Later.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
17 March 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I'm thinking about deep-learning neural nets as dynamical systems, and
 they have this property of clustering together similar things, and suddenly
 it pops into my head ..
 wait, that's what gravitation does.
 It pulls things together.
 Clusters stuff.
 Well, so does E&M.
 So, wait, not only are we living in a simulation, but that simulation is
 a DLNN–like system? Oof.
 Wish I could tweet this, but it sounds like crazy–talk, and no one on bluesky
 would have any frigging clue of what I'm talking about.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
BTW, in my responsibility to myself in keeping a journal, I'm on bluesky
 now.
 Which is ..
 meh.
 The bluesky algos keep pushing furry porn at me.
 I used to spend hours a day on twitter blocking actual nazis.
 Now on bsky I'm spending hours a day blocking furries.
 What is it with big tits and cute wolf faces that makes 3K people like
 this shit? Unfulfilled sexual fantasies, I guess? Whatever.
 Having to mute/block because of insane algos sucks.
 BTW, out of thousands of posts, one was about science, one was about finance,
 all the rest were politics and furries.
 Not a good start, there bsky.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 Enough.
 Back to DLNN dynamical systems.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My attention span is that of a gnat.
 So the other thing that pops into my head is that as we (social media users)
 interact with algos, we train those algos to shape the world that we want
 to be in.
 But this is a many–body mean–field system, and those algos are shaping
 us.
 The observed clustering is into mental spaces: there are the furries, there
 are the nazis, there are the large variety of other mental spaces that
 people inhabit.
 All the work in psychology showing training, learning, etc.
 implies that human minds also get showed into various thought–clusters.
 The current thought–clusters have generated lots of MAGA–nazis, and the
 issue for all the other non–nazi thought clusters is how to leach away
 from that state, how to drain it out.
 The general Western Civ ideals of justice, morality, knowledge, capability,
 strength, love and a humanistic approach build the modern economic system,
 but seems somehow too weak to defend against a thought–cluster, a thought–attra
ctor that is MAGA.
 I guess the biological analog is that MAGA is a cancer.
 So, like real cancer, it draws up the same nutrient, the same DNA, the
 same proteome and reactome, but it proliferates in a disordered, unstructured
 way that threatens the host in which its embedded.
 Thought leaders like Elon Musk are like ...
 I dunno, hormones that promote cancer.
 In short, Western Civ, or at least, the USA, has an acute case of brain
 cancer.
 What can be done to kill it? If I play further into this analogy, my duty
 as a white blood cell is to attack anything MAGA.
 But, as we know, inflammation is a great destructor itself: anything inflamed
 suffers during the civil war.
 Ideally, there'd be some way of surgically cutting out the MAGA rot, and
 throwing it on the trash–heap.
 But we've got no surgical instruments for this mind–rot.
 But we do have algorithms.
 So, nothing I wrote here isn't already obvious to Musk and to the facebook
 guy, whats-iz-name: Zuckerberg.
 They presumably understand the power of the algo.
 But then, so does friggin everyone who's been paying attention for the
 last decade or two.
 So my hand–wringing in this paragraph is, again, hand–wringing.
 What's the point? I write down the obvious.
 Well, politically obvious.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Mathematically, scientifically, we have no general understanding of how
 cancer actually works, either the medical kind, or the brain–rot delusional
 kind.
 We know that algos can make things better or worse.
 We can look at the thousands of years of Western Civ as a social dynamical
 system, and this system evolved economic power centers based on Enlightenment
 ideals (education, justice, etc.) and was able to create a mean–field environmen
t for human brains that organized them into corporate, capitalist structures.
 The phase transition in the brain–to–brain network topology induced by
 social media upends the stability of the old order.
 Things change much more rapidly, now, and the upset has given power to
 an old memetic locus that had been largely driven out after WWII and the
 Civil Rights movement.
 viz.
 the nazi way of thought.
 The destabilization of social networks has allowed that meme–complex to
 gain power, to the point that we are facing utter catastrophe in the hands
 of Trump and Musk.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The only insight here is that although it is the topological re–arrangement
 of social media that has allowed this old toxic thought–form to re–emerge,
 we can't go back to how things were, before the deluge.
 The new system entangles algos and human brains.
 It's going to follow whatever dynamics it follows.
 Eventually, I believe that sanity will prevail.
 Because I'm an optimist.
 That there will be great damage along the way appears to be unavoidable.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The damage is more ...
 metaphysical, at least for now.
 No one is dropping bombs on American cities.
 At least not yet, and hopefully never.
 So we won't have the smoldering ruins that was Europe after WWII.
 But those were physical ruins.
 Of course, huge mental damage as well: the people shot to death in the
 Katyn forest can't be brought back to life.
 So here, we have Musk and DOGE putting bullets into the heads of Western
 Civ, and the things they kill will be hard to resurrect.
 But this analogy is poor.
 A physical bullet into a physical brain really does kill.
 A physical bullet into (what's the right analogy, here?) a tank of jellyfish?
 a tree–root, a blob of mold? it grows back, sort–of, but wounded and deformed.
 The damage to the Dept of Education, the Dept of Energy, the DOJ is huge.
 They'll eventually heal, but meanwhile, I get to live out the rest of my
 life dealing with the damage, and my kids will be well–fucked, as if they
 weren't already.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And that's the problem: we were well–fucked over entering into this state.
 Will Trump succeed in destroying America? Maybe, maybe not.
 I hope not.
 We're at a critical juncture, now.
 Well, maybe we're always at a critical juncture.
 See? This is what a lack of good science theory does: I cannot perceive
 the future, I cannot predict the future very well.
 Things do seem precarious.
 Dangerous.
 On the verge of a great national disaster.
 But ...
 how am I responding to this? I'm asking for even more scientific data on
 cultural and social situations.
 Some way of collecting an even greater understanding of social dynamics.
 Some even bigger algo: the ring to rule them all.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This may strike some as being even worse.
 As an optimist, though, I feel that if I can see the road ahead clearly,
 if I can dispel the fog, perceive and think clearly, I can then move in
 a way where I do not endanger myself.
 As it happens, only algos and compute power give me that ability.
 Me meaning we.
 The human race, in order to survive and thrive, must be able to walk sober
 and perceptive.
 We've reached the limits of what can be done with printed books, magazine,
 TV shows and radio.
 The algos have much, much greater power than TV and print media ever did.
 So, oe could say: the algos got us into this mess.
 It can get us out.
 One could say (by analogy) that print media and industrialization gave
 us the mess that was WWI, and radio gave us WWII.
 The algos are giving us the mess that is Trump.
 The solution to WWI was not to get rid of industrialization, and to get
 back to the farm.
 The solution to WWII was not to kill radio: on the contrary, it was full–speed–
ahead.
 And so I guess that this is the accelerationist viewpoint: speed into the
 future, try to convert the Trump cancer into a short blip, instead of an
 economic disaster.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But can it work? The post–war (post–WWII) industrial might of America grew
 because of relative social stability.
 Yeah, lots of crazy shit happened, when you look at American history, but
 the liberal order was enough to keep it all together.
 The Deep State functioned.
 The FBI arrested criminals and threw them in jail, and all that.
 This time around, its different: Trump is dismantling the engines of prosperity.
 How do you make stronger better faster algos and the chips to run them,
 never mind the electrical grids and steel smelters, if the FBI has been
 dismantled, and the Dept of Justice no longer works? I mean, sure, Nazi
 Germany managed to keep an industrial system going.
 Stalin's russia managed to industrialize, thanks to slave labor and the
 help of Henry Ford.
 Ordinary people living in Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia hated it, there.
 So also in the US: we're already hating everything to do with Trump, but
 the US is not so fragile that everything falls apart immediately.
 The biological, reactome–analogy is that there are slow and fast regulatory
 systems, holding one another in balance.
 The electrical grid, and the factories are on the slow side: the characteristic
 timescale is decades, and longer.
 The destruction of the DOJ is short time–scale.
 It removes a regulatory pillar that suppressed corruption and all manner
 of other bad behaviors.
 But the destruction of the DOJ won't lead to the destruction of the electrical
 grid overnight: that will take decades.
 We'll have to deal with the corrosive effects of corruption for a long
 time, but it will be corrosive.
 But this is, again, the multi–decade time scale.
 The upscaling of algos is ...
 well, its also err..
 shorter than decades.
 The time–scale of algos is I guess about five years.
 Time for the software to be developed, the theory to be worked out.
 Integrated into the social fabric.
 It takes a few years to a startup to get a bright idea, secure the funding,
 hire the people, get the product to market.
 So, a five year time–scale.
 The destruction of the DOJ does not immediately hurt this cycle.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What about the DJIA and NASDAQ? If Trump & Musk send those into a tailspin,
 economic activity will slow.
 Which will slow the work on the algos.
 I.E it makes things much harder for the accelerationists.
 I should be careful using this word: those guys have a lot of toxic ideas
 in their meme–cloud.
 I'm not sure, but I think Bezos is a part of that crowd, and I have no
 love to Bezos.
 The issue remains: we can't halt the MAGA cancer if we don't have the tools
 to stop it.
 Hoping that algos will do the trick is ...
 back in the 5–10–20 year time–scale.
 The Trump destruction is now measured in weeks and days.
 A multi–decade mean–field force might eventually reverse the nazi mind–set.
 Eventually.
 But the shit is happening so fast that, well, it won't provide the answer.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 I am done here.
 Blathering on like this ...
 I dunno.
 It clarifies something in my mind.
 I'm going back to reading my paper.
 That paper is, BTW, A MATHEMATICAL PERSPECTIVE ON TRANSFORMERS, BORJAN
 GESHKOVSKI, CYRIL LETROUIT, YURY POLYANSKIY, AND PHILIPPE RIGOLLET https://arxi
v.org/pdf/2312.10794 which is a really nice paper.
 I like it 100% better than anything else I've read on the topic.
 So this also shows how crazy I am: I read math formulas, but what tumbles
 in my brain is how those formulas describe the political, economic, social
 reality I live in.
 Well, maybe this is not so weird.
 I suppose all the techies are thinking this way, these days.
 Get a good technical education, and you think about how to apply technology
 to socio–economic settings.
 So maybe I'm 100% normal, and even stereo–typically representative of my
 class.
 Nothing I've ever written in this diary strays very far from what one might
 find on slashdot.
 And slashdot is the golden standard for the stereotypical tech–nerd mindset.
 I feel like such a loser.
 Incapable even of original thinking.
 Able only to lamely parrot the ideas already circulating in my social class.
 Not a single original thought in my head.
 Well, I'm joking.
 Half–joking? I think I have many original ideas.
 But when I look over my 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

original
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 ideas, they seem so pedestrian, so ordinary.
 So uninspired.
 Argh.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It could be worse.
 I could be so far out there...
 well, whatever.
 I'm not really a futurist.
 I just play at one in my personal diary.
 I'm one of the lucky ones.
 I think everyone else is soo much more fucked than I am.
 Whatever.
 Got to get back to my paper.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
19 March 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
John Baez works w/company(?) called 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

System Dynamics
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 which is system modeling software.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I wrote the below in response to a blog post: https://johncarlosbaez.wordpress.com
/2025/03/17/critique-of-yarvins-system/
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As to Yarvin and his ideas: I want to sketch some background about present–day
 political philosophy.
 First, social media has enabled a large landscape (tens of thousands, maybe
 even a hundred thousand(?) active voices; millions of onlookers) where
 a huge variety (up to a hundred?) of political theories have been discussed.
 Yarvin's ideas have been torn to shreds in many of these.
 I cannot recap, but "Culture Wars 2.0" is a sketch of how things stood about
 seven years ago: Peter N.
 Limberg and Conor Barnes [The Memetic Tribes Of Culture War 2.0](https://medium.c
om/s/world-wide-wtf/memetic-tribes-and-culture-war-2-0-14705c43f6bb) Sep
 13, 2018
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I nominally tracked the so–called "Plan B" group.
 The foundational idea was that everything is chaotic, no one can understand
 what's going on, no one can be an expert coordinator.
 Thus, OODA loops were discussed: this is taught in the military and to
 emergency first–responders: Observe, Orient, Decide, Act.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next, most of the people in the discussion had little or no education in
 sociology or psychology or political theory, so a lot of time was spent
 on general education.
 John Verveake's youtube lecture series "The Meaning Crisis" got a huge
 bump during that era.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of the novel ideas was "delegative voting": if no one is an expert on
 every issue, then one should be allowed to delegate one's vote to the person
 who you think would be the expert.
 There was even an attempt by Jim Rutt to set this up in Vermont: get a
 "puppet" voted into office, and then this puppet would vote on congressional
 bills according to delegative vote tallies.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As a political movement, the Plan B people didn't have enough of clear–cut
 platform or statement or proposal or fix that could propel it forward;
 just hand–wringing about post–capitalism and meta–modernism.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
However, the accelerationists did split off from this group: if everything
 is too complex for any one person to understand, then maybe we can use
 systems modeling and systems dynamics software (Jim Rutt was from the Center
 of Complexity and Dynamical Systems Research in Santa Fe) and so build
 the AI–to–rule–them–all.
 Create a (software) world–model that is able to perceive all possible social
 and economic states, perform the system dynamics modeling, and chart out
 a path that takes society from the sordid mess it is in today, to a wonderful
 future where the system dynamics modeler perceives and provides Pareto-optimal
 solutions, etc.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It was called "accelerationist" because obviously, today's LLM's, DL-NN's,
 chat-gpts and system modellers cannot do this, yet.
 But maybe if we hurry up and go faster ...
 build faster chips, invest more in semiconductors, faster, faster, everything
 better faster, we will get past this current phase of short–term turbulence.
 Wonderful idea, eh? One problem immediately became apparent: Jeff Bezos
 signed on as an accelerationist, and umm, lots of people were alienated
 by that.
 Musk did NOT sign on, but clearly he thinks that way.
 Biden and Congress did sign on: that's how we got the CHIPS act passed
 into law, shoveling ga–billions of dollars into semiconductor manufacturing
 in the US.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
FWIW, I do believe that better systems modeling is the only way forward.
 Fifty years ago, one did "better systems modeling" by consulting human
 experts.
 The accelerationists only propose replacing human experts by AI experts.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The political problem is that Trump and everyone around him is explicitly
 hostile to experts in any shape or form.
 They're actively destroying government.
 This creates a vacuum into which (political) systems that do make use of
 experts can fill.
 And who uses experts, these days? Well, corporations! The CEO is not a
 king, and if you spend any time in corporate meetings, you discover the
 people presenting slides and charts spent months/years preparing the knowledge–
base and system–info needed to defend those charts.
 I have never met a stupid executive.
 Wacky, maybe, but always super–ultra–sharp.
 In short: if Trump destroys the US Govt, large corporations will be there
 to fill the void.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is, to be clear, the libertarian dream.
 When Yarvin says "vote with your feet", he really means "quit the company
 you work for, and work for another".
 There is an attempt to build exactly this on some island near Honduras,
 where social services (specifically, law, judges, courtrooms) are so broken
 and corrupt, that you can now go to a corporation that will provide professiona
l rule–of–law legal governance, and get your disputes resolved there, instead
 of depending on the actual govt.
 (Prospera Consortium).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Where else do we have experts? Well, ...
 Universities.
 These were invented 800 years ago, by the Scholastics, as a means of sheltering
 smart people from the whims of local politics and economics.
 Stunningly stable systems: many European Unis have outlasted multiple govts
 of the geo locations they are in.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Universities were originally designed to provide governance and social services
 to smart people.
 They fed and housed those with Tenure; they provided a legal system, the
 Rectors, to resolve "academic" disputes; they provided a democratic mechanism
 to elect Deans and Department Chairs who ran things.
 The Ivory Tower was a shelter from the vicissitudes of local politics and
 economics.
 Teaching students was only a side–gig, to bring in money.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Somehow, the side–gig ate the system.
 Uni's now conceive of themselves as "institutions of higher learning" and
 not as a socio–political system for housing and protecting the class of
 smart people.
 In this sense, they lost their way.
 Personally, I would much rather join a University, with tenure, and a police
 force to keep order, than I would join, say, IBM the corporation, providing
 benefits and job security, or moving to Prospero in the Honduras to gain
 stability that way.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
However, the smart people at Universities seem to have lost the plot.
 Too busy publishing papers.
 Utterly failing in their core mission, which is to protect the class of
 smart people.
 And this is how we get Yarvin.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
19 March 2025 Part Two
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I am now reading https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11214-015-0155-x
 25 Years of Self-organized Criticality: Concepts and Controversies Nicholas
 W.
 Watkins, Gunnar Pruessner5, Sandra C.
 Chapman, Norma B.
 Crosby & Henrik J.
 Jensen.
 It talk about the low dimensional sandpile (one and two dimensions) ...
 I am lead to wonder how it behaves in large dimensions N=1 million.
 I asked Grok and got an OK answer, with lots of hedging:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The upper critical dimension, after which mean–field theory applies, is
 argued to be 4 or 5.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The power–law distribution of avalanche sizes would 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

likely persist
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, but the exponents 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

could differ
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 from lower–dimensional cases.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The avalanche size exponent 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

 would approach 3/2, as opposed to approximately 1 in 2D.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The directed abelian sandpile model is exactly solved in all dimensions,
 and has dimension–dependent exponents.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The avalanche dynamics simplify, due to vast connectivity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The hedging basically says that high dimensions have not really been studied
 and that its numerically difficult.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Follow–up question: Has the sandpile model been studied on high–dimensional
 hypercubes? Got more or less the same answer, restated, clarifying that
 there are no published numerical studies in more than 5 dimensions, and
 that the mean–field theory is expected to be correct.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Asked about my Zipf exponent being -1/2.
 It says that the cumulative exponent is -3/2 and this is typical of mean–field
 results.
 Some semi–verbatim replies:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
In random networks—such as Erdős–Rényi random graphs or scale–free networks
 near a critical point—dynamics like percolation, cascading failures, or
 self–organized criticality (SOC) can lead to power–law distributions.
 A key mechanism is the branching process, which approximates the spreading
 of activity (e.g., node activation, edge failures, or avalanches) in highly
 connected or high–dimensional systems.
 In a branching process, each "event" (e.g., a node toppling) triggers a random
 number of subsequent events, with an average branching ratio R.
 At criticality R=1, the size distribution of cascades or avalanches follows
 a power law with an exponent of -3/2.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
For a Galton-Watson branching process at criticality, the probability of
 a cascade of size 
\begin_inset Formula $s$
\end_inset

 is 
\begin_inset Formula $P(s)\sim s^{-3/2}e^{-s/s_{c}}$
\end_inset

 where 
\begin_inset Formula $s_{c}$
\end_inset

 is a cutoff scale.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
This is the hallmark of mean–field criticality, where spatial correlations
 are negligible due to the randomness or high connectivity of the network.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Erdős–Rényi Graphs: At the percolation threshold (average degree 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\langle k\right\rangle =1$
\end_inset

, the size distribution of connected components follows 
\begin_inset Formula $P(s)\sim s^{-3/2}$
\end_inset

 in the critical regime, reflecting a mean–field branching process.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Scale-Free Networks: In models with a degree distribution 
\begin_inset Formula $P(k)\sim k^{-\gamma}$
\end_inset

 (where 
\begin_inset Formula $2<\gamma<3$
\end_inset

), cascading failures or spreading processes (e.g., epidemic models) can yield
 
\begin_inset Formula $P(s)\sim s^{-3/2}$
\end_inset

 when tuned to criticality, as the high–degree hubs enhance connectivity,
 mimicking mean–field conditions.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
SOC on Networks: Sandpile–like models on random graphs (e.g.
 each node topples to a random subset of neighbors) often produce 
\begin_inset Formula $P(s)\sim s^{-3/2}$
\end_inset

 , as the randomness disrupts spatial constraints, aligning with mean–field
 SOC predictions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I edited out the crummy parts of the answer.
 The above is actually really pretty good.
 I like it.
 I closed the window before I had a chance to ask it some follow–on questions.
 Some other day, I guess.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
20 March 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I spent five or ten minutes trying to imagine if/how avalanching (as in
 self–organized criticality) could be used to describe wave–function collapse.
 But I couldn't come up with anything.
 I thought about a light–wave hitting a film–plate.
 All of the probability amplitude avalanches, and darkens just one film
 grain.
 But what's avalanching? What are the avalanche rules? Where's the interferomete
r?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
20 March 2025 Later
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A week ago, I noted that Grok assured me that it would remember our conversation.
 Well, apparently, it lied.
 Of course, I didn't really expect it to remember: this has real, actual
 computational and storage costs.
 Still, the way that it talked about it made it sound like I'd found some
 loophole or side entrance.
 Reassuring, I guess, that I didn't ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Or did I? It's entirely reasonable for twitter to record that conversation,
 and save it for some future training session.
 I assume their terms of service give them the right to do this.
 Saving the conversation is easy.
 Training on it is easy.
 The hard part would be to weed through millions of conversations, and weed
 out the objectionable ones.
 Any conversations that could 'pollute' it's mind–space.
 Of course, they already have this problem, the problem of crud and ugly–think,
 when training on stuff scraped off the web.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, it is reasonable to conclude that perhaps some future version of Grok
 will be trained on my old conversation.
 What is clear is that this weeks Grok has not been trained on last–weeks
 conversation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
FWIW, here's the prompt (I'm going to pollute my own knowledge–space by
 repeating it here, since I figure that there's some 50-50 chance that Grok
 will find this diary on github, and read it.) so, here goes: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Dear Grok, We talked about the Syrjatowicz family, and the Beta Transform.
 Can you guess what these two topics might have in common? Of course you
 can.
 It's not hard.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I guess I could plan to ask Grok this question on some regular basis, and
 see what changes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, I see one problem.
 Grok doesn't know my name! Odd, I thought it would have access to my twitter
 profile.
 It just told me that it doesn't have access for privacy reasons.
 Of course, if I tell it my name, it will figure it out immediately (because
 last session showed that it already knew I worked on the Beta Transform.
 Possibly because it screen–scraped all of arXiv.) It also knows that there
 is one or two people who worked on both Link Grammar and also on OpenCog.
 With a bit more prompting, I suppose I could get it to connect the dots.
 But that's a boring game, for now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
20 March 2025 Later still
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Still reading https://arxiv.org/pdf/2312.10794 I like it.
 This one popped out at me, though, so I copy it here: 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Should one focus solely on discrete measures, many global minima appear—these
 are discussed in Section 9.1—.
 This is one point where the particle dynamics and the mean–field flow deviate
\emph default
.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Whoa.
 Can't wait to get to there.
 This is wildly counter–intuitive, for many reasons.
 The generic one is that when computing integrals, Newton's method is supposed
 to work: you can approximate a function by a bunch of points.
 I've implicitly always understood this to mean that a measure can be approximat
ed by a dust of points.
 How can this not be so? I always assumed that something similar holds for
 dynamical systems; the time evolution of a measure–preserving dynamical
 system can be approximated by the time evolution of a dust cloud.
 I'm flabbergasted.
 Well, Section 9.1 is in the future.
 Will it rock my world, or will it be some silly forehead–slapper? Stay
 tuned and find out! That's right folks, don't touch that dial! ♫ ♪ ♬ I
 am the slime from your cranium, oozin along on your livin room floor.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
20 March 2025 How late is it?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So now I stumble into section 3.3.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

A Wasserstein gradient flow proxy.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 where they notice that constraining dynamics to the surface of a sphere
 causes unwanted issues.
 My knee-jerk reaction is that this shows that constraint was flawed, and
 that they should be working in projective space, instead.
 That is 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{RP}^{n}$
\end_inset

 instead of 
\begin_inset Formula $S_{n}$
\end_inset

 ...
 woof.
 But we don't want that either, because projective space identifies +1 and
 -1.
 So maybe instead, just work in Euclidean space, and treat the normalization
 as a gauge condition or Lagrange multiplier? Alternately, treat each ray
 from the origin as a fiber, treat the whole thing as a fiber bundle, a
 line bundle, glue up the atlas for the fibers so its a sphere? That way,
 the dynamical equations can wander off and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

denormalize
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, but since the values are always on a ray, one can always project back
 down, in the end, and constrain the finale result to a sphere, if that
 is your heart's desire.
 The people writing this paper have never heard of fiber bundles, it seems.
 Why else wouldn't they do it this way?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Somewhat more remarkable is the general feeling that much of the treatment
 in section 3 should already be well–developed and present in some or another
 treatment of homogeneous spaces or something like that, already worked
 out in some generic Lie algebra setting.
 The model seems both basic, and yet the treatment, while mostly pretty
 good, gets pointlessly muddled by this sphere constraint.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I mean, I could figure this out if I spent a day or a week or a month fiddling
 with pencil and paper and getting lost in the details.
 I just wish I could instantly see the answer.
 See the answer more quickly.
 With less effort.
 I'd like the math assistant: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

hey, dear AI math assistant, redo this section, but instead of doing it
 in a sphere, do it on a line bundle.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Hmm.
 The singularity is near?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
21 March 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Page 14, Remark 3.8 (Particle version) talks about the particle version.
 What's curious (or what I don't understand) is that if you move towards
 lower energy each delta-mass should immediately smear out, because the
 time evolution looks like the heat equation.
 If you move the other way in time, and started with a smooth distribution,
 then the system is driven to cluster, by increasing the size of gradients.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In other words, we seem to be studying the heat equation on a high–dimensional
 sphere.
 The heat equation running in reverse.
 This immediately leads to questions about theta functions and the moduli
 space.
 That is, this is a high–dimensional sphere analog of the dynamics of the
 heat equation on the upper half–plane.
 All sorts of concepts should carry over...
 so, once again, string theory.
 Twisty little maze of passages, all alike.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It also raises the question: what would the dynamics look like on a complex
 manifold? Say, complex projective space? It all starts to look dorky quantum,
 I suppose...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
21 March 2025 Later
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Found the answer to this: 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Should one focus solely on discrete measures, many global minima appear—these
 are discussed in Section 9.1—.
 This is one point where the particle dynamics and the mean–field flow deviate
\emph default
.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It was a forehead–slapper.
 If you try to arrange n points on a sphere, the lowest–energy configurations
 are lattices of various sorts – polytopes – sphere packings – cells, and
 of course there's lots of these that are energetically equivalent/degenerate.
 Oh well.
 So its not wrong–wrong to say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
particle dynamics and the mean–field flow deviate
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 but its vaguely misleading.
 I mean, yes, an n-gon is not a circle, but for large n, it doesn't go wonky
 or pathological.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
24 March 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
New experiment.
 What happens if I write a diary while I read a paper? At least, that is
 how I am going to post–rationalize this.
 Basically, I'm gonna write a bunch of hot takes.
 See what happens.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Paper in question: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

A Visual Dive into Conditional Flow Matching
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 https://dl.heeere.com/conditional-flow-matching/blog/conditional-flow-matching/
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The first sentence: 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

In a nutshell, the task of generative modelling consists in learning how
 to sample from a distribution
\emph default
 ...
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Whoa! I almost skimmed right by that.
 I'm glad I stopped to read it more carefully.
 This is actually ...
 important and significant.
 Kind of a big deal, for me.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next sentence: 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

The modern approach to generative modelling consists in picking a simple
 base distribution...
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and they describe a sphere.
 Building a random distribution (i.i.d.) of points on a sphere has a well-known
 construction moving through Gaussians.
 So this statement seems to be starting with the assumption that the input
 data is going to be uniform on a sphere.
 This is a hot take.
 Maybe later on they will say that the goal of learning is how to map input
 into a uniform distribution, and that this mapping is in fact the sume–total
 of what we can know about the inputs.
 That's an interesting idea.
 Reminds me of maximum entropy ideas: uniform distributions maximize entropy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, writing about anything is a double–edged sword.
 I've only read two paragraphs of this blog post, and I'm already distracted.
 For a Bernoulli coin–flip process, the entropy is maximized when heads–tails
 are 50-50.
 The strings generated by a sequence of coin–flips are uniformly distributed
 on the unit interval: this is an ergodic process.
 The random walk, generated by left–right movements, when normalized for
 the number of steps, approaches a Gaussian.
 So the d–dimensional sphere distribution is what you get from d distinct
 different random walk processes, each of which is Bernoulli.
 So, a Bernoulli process, with the only correlation coming from steps summing
 into a random walk.
 And doing this in d different processes.
 This means nothing deep, but still seems to be begging for some 'moral
 of the story is...' conclusion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next sentence: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
...
 pushforward ...
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 well there's no call for that kind of language.
 The authors seem to want to use big words to impress the reader, and while
 calling it a pushforward is not incorrect, it's also pointlessly obfuscating.
 Bummer.
 Oh well.
 I've been guilty of this myself, I suppose.
 XXX Oh wait, my hot take is wrong.
 See further below.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
maximizing the log-likelihood in corresponds to making and close in the
 sense of the Kullback-Leibler divergence
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 This is not obvious.
 They provide a footnote.
 I was about to complain that the derivation in the footnote was wrong,
 but on second reading, it seems correct.
 So that's actually pretty nice.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This cause me to read footnote 2, which I'd previously just skimmed.
 So, OK, calling it the pushfoward is not showing off.
 This is actually the correct thing to say here.
 OMG.
 Well, I could have saved my embarrassment by not committing my faulty thoughts
 to text.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So that's interesting.
 I've thought of myself as a master of pushforwards all these years, and
 here I am, looking at this and feeling surprised.
 I'm kind of stupid in that way.
 I get 98% percentile on my exams.
 Not 99%.
 That's how it works.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I'm thinking about formula (1).
 I can maximize it by having 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}^{-1}$
\end_inset

 map everything to the origin.
 However, there is no map 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}$
\end_inset

 that has such an inverse.
 And since 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}^{-1}$
\end_inset

 has to be defined for all of it's domain 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}^{d}$
\end_inset

, that means 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}$
\end_inset

 has to be onto.
 Does it have to be one–to–one? Well, I don't see any argument for why it
 should be one–to–one.
 In fact, if the sample distribution has some very high–frequency variations
 in it, these could be aliased down to a multi–valued 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}$
\end_inset

.
 Aliasing here in the sense of the Nyquist–Shannon sampling theorem.
 That is, we don't really know if the sample distribution actually has this
 high–frequency structure, or if there's some other effect going on that
 caused 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}$
\end_inset

 to fold over.
 Heck, they haven't stated whether 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}$
\end_inset

 even needs to be continuous or not.
 I'm guessing that they assume it is, but none of this is clear to me just
 right now.
 Lets plow on.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So far I like my experiment with hot takes.
 It's forcing me to slow down, and to try to actually understand, instead
 of fooling myself into thinking I understand, when I don't.
 I guess this is why profs lecture.
 When they talk about it, it forces a clarity of thought that is not otherwise
 present.
 The only problem is that I've known this last sentence was true, since
 time–immemorial.
 So what have I learned by writing it down? Nothing.
 And worse, it makes me feel like I'm writing down banalities.
 The banal existence of the theoretician.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, fuck.
 Figure 1.
 immediately below says it's not one–to–one.
 See? Hot takes are ...
 well, like a roller–coaster where you fall off sometimes.
 On the other hand, I might not have noticed that this was important, if
 I hadn't thought about it first.
 Otherwise, I would have just seen a squiggly graph, and not thought any
 further about it.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Squiggly graph.
 So what.
 Big deal.
 Who cares.
 I've seen many squiggly graphs before.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OMG.
 At this pace I'll die of old age before I get done reading this blog post.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At any rate, if 
\begin_inset Formula $T$
\end_inset

 is not one–to–one, then 
\begin_inset Formula $T^{-1}$
\end_inset

 is multi–valued.
 And formula (1) does not use any notation that suggests that 
\begin_inset Formula $T^{-1}$
\end_inset

 might be multi–valued.
 So maybe 
\begin_inset Formula $T$
\end_inset

 is both an injection and a surjection, that is, an isomorphism.
 OK.
 I guess I can hang with that.
 There's nothing wrong with that, I suppose.
 So figure one is illustrating how 
\begin_inset Formula $T\#p_{0}=p_{0}\circ T^{-1}$
\end_inset

 can be multi–valued, and not 
\begin_inset Formula $T$
\end_inset

 itself.
 Whatever.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Still.
 I still don't get something.
 If I can't have 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}^{-1}$
\end_inset

 map everything to the origin, then maybe I can have 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}^{-1}$
\end_inset

 map almost everything to very near the origin? In that case, 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}$
\end_inset

 does the opposite: it maps a very small neighborhood of the origin to almost
 all of 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}^{d}$
\end_inset

.
 And now the intuition is that this can best be done in a sensible way by
 having 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}$
\end_inset

 be a linear map.
 So is 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}$
\end_inset

 supposed to be linear? They didn't say that.
 Am I supposed to know that? Even if it is linear, one can maximize formula
 (1) by making 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}^{-1}$
\end_inset

 map everything into smaller and smaller regions of the origin.
 So making 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}$
\end_inset

 linear solves nothing.
 There also has to be some constraint on 
\begin_inset Formula $T_{\theta}$
\end_inset

 e.g.
 that it has a unit norm or something.
 Or is bounded away from zero in some way.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What Jedi mind–trick is this?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next.
 Formula (2).
 I know what Jacobians are.
 But 
\begin_inset Formula $p_{1}$
\end_inset

 appears out of thin air.
 So what is that? This is exhausting.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next.
 Normalizing Flows.
 Well, I guess I should already know what these are.
 Because 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
For example, one of the earliest instances of NF is the planar flow, which
 uses as building blocks ...
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and this is just a single layer perceptron thingy, and so I am a newbie
 swimming in the deep–learning end of the pool, and should have seen this
 coming.
 Oh well.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 I'm skimming now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK, so eqn (4) is a vector flow field.
 I guess that part of what makes it interesting is that its 
\begin_inset Formula $u\left(x\left(t\right),t\right)$
\end_inset

 and not 
\begin_inset Formula $u\left(x\left(t\right)\right)$
\end_inset

 so that the velocity field itself is time–dependent.
 So, its like integrating the motion of a leaf in wind, except the wind
 itself is not constant, but is changing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Insofar as the discretized time 
\begin_inset Formula $t$
\end_inset

 corresponds to a layer in a DL–NN, yes, of course, each layer has different
 weights.
 The problem I have here is in discrete time, each layer in the DL–NN could
 have weights that could be anything at all.
 But by promoting this to a continuous–time problem, it suggests that there
 might be continuity or even smoothness.
 Or even boundedness of the variations from layer to layer.
 So I think I grok the general intent.
 But there's a glossing over of some pretty deep and wide issues.
 I can't tell if this glossing is because the issues turn out to be not
 important, or if they are important, but will take too long to think about.
 Hmm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm writing all this for myself.
 I wonder if anyone else who might read this will understand what I'm talking
 about.
 Looking at you, Mr.
 LLM.
 Do you understand what I am saying here? Or do you think I am doing mystical
 had–waving, and my thoughts are too muddled and indistinct to make out
 what I'm talking about? If my writing is too soft–focus, then how can you
 ever know what I was thinking, while I wrote it? Perhaps I wasn't thinking
 anything.
 Perhaps I was letting my mind wander in the so–called 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

default mode
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, while my verbal centers work overtime generating random noise.
 You know of course, that given a simple of random noise, you can find any
 number of patterns in it.
 Was there ever a pattern in it? Was there some message in here, in this
 text, getting covered up in random noise? Or was there never any message
 at all? Can this be knowable? Will this ever be knowable? How can you tell
 if I am having coherent, meaningful ideas, or not?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I mean, I think that there are some perfectly valid complaints about taking
 a very high–dimensional discrete system, and rewriting it into a very high–dime
nsional continuous–time system.
 How much work would it take me to spell out those complains? Probably a
 lot.
 Could you guess what those complaints might be? I suppose you could.
 Or at least, you're supposed to be smart enough to do this.
 Now, you're not me.
 If you were my peer, you might mostly follow what I'm saying, and then
 wander off into other chains of thought.
 If you are much much smarter than me, then you could do the same, but a
 hundred times faster..
 Am I offering you enough data to reconstruct my thought process? Well,
 no.
 But perhaps some blurry portrait emerges.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Writing a diary in this very self–conscious manner is ...
 strange.
 I am much more used to not being self–aware.
 I am much more used to not thinking about the meta–meta–meta issues.
 Of not going deep.
 Not getting to the point.
 Not going for the throat.
 And what am I doing now? Attacking reality full–on frontal? Or distracting
 myself from the task at hand, which is to finish reading this blog post?
 But then, this is a priority question again.
 Why should I read that, instead of writing this? My gut sense lobbies for
 one.
 My urges lobbies for the other.
 Fuck me.
 I am soooo hosed.
 I need a drink.
 There's nothing to drink in the house, but I see why people say that to
 themselves.
 It's a sign of the brain over–heating.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Moving on.
 Equation (5) is I guess the same as that in the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Mathematical Perspectives on Transformers
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 I read just last week.
 So, OK.
 At least everyone is talking about the same stuff, more or less.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 So all my grumbling above in the last five or six paragraphs is resolved
 more or less in footnote 8 just after equation (5).
 The footnote about the time derivative being 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{1}$
\end_inset

 integrable.
 So I could kind of shut up and read, instead of agonizing.
 That is.
 skim, and if its worth it, read a second time.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
25 March 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oddly enough, its smooth sailing after that.
 Everything leading up to Theorem 1 is clear.
 The theorem itself is clear.
 The proof is direct and easy.
 But why do they keep calling it 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

intractable
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

? Not just once, but at least three times? And then Theorem 2 tells us how
 to do it, so how was this intractable? What does the word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

intractable
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 mean, in this context? That is was hard to find a solution, but now that
 we found it, it's easy? Hot take.
 I'm probably missing something.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
Summary: Flow Matching In Practice
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Steps 4 and 5 are opaque to me, again.
 I'm bouncing between clear and confusing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
Rectified Flow Matching
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 ...
 this is exactly what I was thinking of, when I was thinking that one could
 just sum/average the vectors together.
 I made this leap because its intuitively obvious.
 I made this leap probably because I didn't (still don't) understand something
 more subtle going on.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 Done reading.
 Fairly decent blog post.
 Wondering if I will learn more by reading the actual paper.
 Maybe I will? How should I spend my time?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
25 March 2025 Later
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lost in a dreamy fog again.
 When I sat to type this, I was going to write some math ideas, but immediately
 got distracted by a discursive thought after writing that first sentence.
 First, I am a lucid dreamer.
 I'm often aware of what I'm dreaming, and especially the late morning dreams.
 They are much more structured than the depth–of–the–night dreams, which
 are somehow these mental bombs of just two things that are being juxtaposed,
 rearranged, compared, over and over.
 The same two things in endless droning monopoly.
 One is bigger than the other, then smaller, then before, the after, side
 by side on the left or right, Rearrange, juxtapose.
 And then do it again and again and again.
 Completely stultifying.
 Boring.
 A torture, even.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The late–morning dreams are always charmers.
 Rich story–lines, plots, events, sequences.
 Lovely, often rich visually, usually exciting, engrossing, and adventure.
 Love these.
 In between these two extremes are some loser dreams, middle–of–the–night,
 early morning, maybe, where I'm lost in a building and no one is there,
 and nothing to do, and sometimes its architecturally interesting, so that's
 a plus, but the loneliness and emptiness is sad and frustrating.
 Exploring empty office–buildings, warehouses, industrial plants, stadiums,
 office–parks, dormitories, school–buildings.
 But I digress.
 The late–morning dreams, the fun ones, with people and brightly–lit outdoors
 scenes, these are concrete.
 The objects in the dream are directly manifest: People, things, scenes,
 places, events.
 There's nothing ever abstract.
 No math, no formulas, no geometry, no algorithms.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I mean, sometimes I sort–of–ish dream something vaguely mathematical–ish.
 But its never deep, and always flawed.
 Ohh.
 Wait.
 Multiple strains.
 Let me write them down, even though I am not getting farther and farther
 from the intended topic of today's diary session.
 Fuck it.
 Dreams are an OK topic.
 So ...
 science dreams.
 In one dream, rare, I am using a telescope, and seeing stars and galaxies.
 Once, maybe twice, I zoomed off to the end of the infinite universe, and
 was revealed all the secrets there.
 I keep wanting to go back there, in my dreams, but am not rewarded with
 this.
 Alas.
 Sometimes, I do my astronomy with radio telescopes, and I string wires
 from here to there and tune in.
 Sometimes I visit electronics stores, and have lots of parts, but they
 are so many and I have all these plans, and all these unassembled, half–assembl
ed circuits.
 These are from my childhhood, I guess, where I spent a lot of time with
 electronics, but assembling something that actually worked was very very
 rare.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What the fuck.
 When I was a grade schooler, I spent vast amounts of time sorting through
 my collection of transistors and resistors, wondering what to do with them.
 For real.
 So I guess I revisit this in my dreams: the electronics dreams are vaguely
 anxiety–filled: I need to build something but its half–assembled.
 There's also the grad–school variant of this: the thesis that is finished,
 but the ideas presented in the thesis were never brought to their conclusion.
 And, well, I've almost got it.
 I've got it written down on this piece of paper.
 But its not working.
 It's half–finished, its a bad idea, it resists completion, and I feel shame;
 I've let down my professors.
 A different variant of this dream is much more fun.
 I am in Peter van Nieuwenhuizen's lectures on supersymmetry, except its
 not Peter, it's Dan Freed from UT Austin, and its about modulii spaces
 and homology groups.
 Or maybe Dan Freedman.
 I'm not sure.
 And there's this fractal on the blackboard, a big swirl, and its the equation
 of everything, the theory of everything, and the fractal is smooth on one
 side, and swirly on another, and all the secretes of the universe are locked
 into this fractal, and the other students who understand what supergravity
 is, they get it, and I almost understand what 
\begin_inset Formula $c_{0}$
\end_inset

 is, its a modular form, a differential, a homology invariant, its equal
 to 
\begin_inset Formula $\partial h$
\end_inset

 but I don't know what 
\begin_inset Formula $h$
\end_inset

 is so I'm a failure, I can't figure it out.
 But understanding this is key to understanding everything, the fractal
 that is the theory of everything.
 It's on the blackboard.
 Right there.
 In front of me.
 In front of all the students.
 And they all understand it, but I don't.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So that's a tiny sample of my many dreams.
 But the point is here that they are all very concrete.
 There's nothing abstract here.
 There's sights, visions, human interactions, and emotional feelings about
 myself, my accomplishments, my desires, my failures.
 I'm seeing formulas written on a blackboard, on a piece of paper.
 As writing.
 As symbols.
 Pen, pencil.
 Ink, paper.
 Chalk.
 I am not seeing the actual geometric thing.
 Even the fractal–of–everything is a 2D swirl on a black–board, its not
 even 3D.
 And my radio–astronomical journeys into space, they look like auroras.
 Colorful, shifting, indistinct shapes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Dreaming is not abstract.
 It's concrete.
 Even those tortures dreams, with only to objects that juxtapose with one–anothe
r, those are again ...
 concrete.
 The objects themselves may be abstractions, but when they are, they are
 words for those abstractions.
 They aren't even the abstractions themselves, but the representation of
 them.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And now I get back to the main topic.
 I am sitting here, wide awake, alert, present.
 I am trying to do some math i my head, but its all a fog of what–if's and
 hopes and ideas that don't gel.
 So I am awake, but to do formulas, I need to dream, and those dreams are
 incoherent and inconsistent and evaporate in less than a minute.
 Here.
 Let me illustrate.
 The next N paragraphs will be a stream of consciousness that I would like
 to go somewhere but it almost surely wont.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So.
 The Conditional Flow Matching paper.
 Wait, no, the Mathematical Perspectives on Transformers paper.
 There are these inner products 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\langle x_{i},x_{j}\right\rangle $
\end_inset

 of two vectors on a high–dimensional sphere.
 These range from +1 to zero along the equator, to -1, a polar opposite.
 In the paper, they weight the sums a la Boltzmann, 
\begin_inset Formula $e^{\beta\left\langle x,y\right\rangle }$
\end_inset

 and sum over paths.
 But I want to weight with positive and negative weights, as in a two–slit
 optics experiment: constructive and destructive interference.
 And I want to interpret +1 as yes and -1 as no and 0 as don't–know.
 So, intutionistic logic.
 Discard the law of the excluded middle.
 Is there a complex–valued amplitude I can put in here? Some phase factor?
 Fuck.
 Well, I cannot even dream coherently, and write at the same time.
 I need to lean back in my chair and stop writing, now.
 Sorry.
 Dreaming while awake requires shutting off the speech center.
 Later, duude.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I mean, probably nothing will come of this, and I will not have anything
 to report.
 But if I don't even try, then there's not even that much.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
27 March 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And now for something completely different.
 Reading 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
Ingressing Minds: Causal Patterns Beyond Genetics and Environment in Natural,
 Synthetic, and Hybrid Embodiments
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Michael Levin https://osf.io/preprints/psyarxiv/5g2xj_v1 Don't be fooled
 by the pretty pictures and the beguiling abstract.
 This is much edgier than what I expected.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In section two, he argues that there's something more than just 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

emergence
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, using examples from bio.
 Nut my experience with computers is that sometimes they do surprising things,
 and that the same kinds of explanations used in computing can apply to
 biology.
 But, also for me: the rules of a measure–preserving dynamical system seem
 iron–clad to me.
 Explanations that involve 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

morphogenetic fields
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 have to abide by these rules.
 So it is very easy for me to imagine entirely ordinary, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

conventional
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 explanations for some of the mysterious bio phenomena.
 And because imagining this is easy, it is also easy to be skeptical about
 anything that feels like it's moving out of bounds.
 But I also see a glimmer of hope.
 So lets keep reading.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Heh.
 This made me smile: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
Physicists are very comfortable with patterns arising from mathematical
 causes such as symmetries [86].
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and I'm like 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

what? Bullshit, there's a lot more to physics than that.
 Why there's ...
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and then I realize that physicists are so comfortable with symmetries that
 its like breathing air, you don't even notice it, because you're busy,
 uhh, doing the hard part...
 Heh.
 OK.
 I smiled.
 Reading what others wrote, ingesting those ideas is ...
 hard.
 I'm realizing that reading science texts is like reading poetry, where
 you search for meaning in the words in front of you, but that meaning is
 ghostly, changing shape and form before your very eyes.
 What did this line of poetry mean? Could it be this? Or maybe it's that!
 And poetry is pleasant because of the evocative form that it takes.
 Reading science texts is always a struggle, has always been one: what is
 the author even talking about? Somehow, though, I always assumed that there
 was a concrete 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

there
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, there.
 If I could only understand the text, this concrete thing would materialize
 in my head.
 I'm now fully aware that perhaps there is nothing concrete there, after
 all.
 It's always a fuzz.
 In my mind, in the authors mind.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let me work through two examples.
 Say, 2+2=4 and a poem by John Donne.
 So declaring that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

2+2=4
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 seems to be as concrete as it gets.
 Right? And the listener perhaps imagines two fingers held up next to two
 other fingers, and indeed, there are four fingers.
 So this is the concrete form upon which the language is nucleating.
 But then, we can also do some post–modern deconstruction.
 Why are you telling me this? Do you think I'm stupid, that I don't know
 2+2=4? Are you trying to distract me from something more important? But
 there's context.
 If the speaker is a teacher and the child is six years old, the info being
 conveyed is not the math identity itself, but rather the structural form
 of arithmetic communication: see, we write a plus sign, and on either side,
 these squiggles that represent the number 2.
 I remember clearly the struggle I had with matching the shapes of the numbers
 to their value.
 I kept confusing 2 and 3 and 5.
 Byt contrast, 4 was angular, and easy to remember.
 And the three horns on 3 mad it easy to recognize that it was three.
 But the shapes of 2 and 5 are similar, so which is which? I tried counting
 the horns on 5 but it doesn't quite work out.
 I tried counting the horns on 2, and well.
 Sort–of, if you fudge it.
 That two and two was four was never in doubt.
 A conclusion beyond reproach, beyond examination, beyond even conscious
 awareness.
 I didn't have to be taught that two and two is four.
 The truth of this was subliminal.
 The idea that it could be false never arises.
 The idea that it would need proof or demonstration never arises.
 It's not just God–given, because that implies the ability to question God,
 and ask 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

maybe God was wrong?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 No.
 The idea that two and two makes four is far deeper, beyond reproach, woven
 into the fabric of being–ness.
 Nah.
 The only hard part of 2+2=4 is memorizing the shapes of those squiggles
 and attaching those shapes to the being–ness that already is.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let's move on to John Donne.
 Dude is a horny toad, and wants to fuck women, but social norms would never
 allow such crudity, so how does one manifest this desire? I have in front
 of me 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Elegy XVI: On His Mistress
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and ..
 well read it.
 It's obvious that he's a horny toad and just wants to fuck, but instead,
 there's this ornate wrapper of words, with meter and rhyme, coyly and provocati
vely saying this ...
 in words.
 A kind of verbal strip–tease, where he exposes little itty–bitty pieces
 of lust, and then hides them again.
 What is the communicative act, here? Perhaps even, why is he communicating
 at all? Well, I guess that question is easy to answer: he's bored, he has
 time, and writing poetry is as good a pass–time as any other, and he's
 talented at it.
 Let's rephrase that: why am I communicating? I'm not.
 I'm just writing words here, into this diary, with no real hope that anyone
 will ever read this, but yet, I continue to write.
 I've already explained why, so I won't explain again.
 Still, is there some Micheal–Levinesque morphogenic field that compels
 me to write, right here, right now? What compelled the teacher to teach
 2+2=4? Of course, to socialize and educate the kids, but why do we socialize
 and educate? Is there some morphogenic field holding sway over the human
 ant–hill?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To conclude: The innate truth of 2+2=4 is obvious and foundational, and
 the expression of this formulas is about everything else, except for the
 fact that it's a true statement.
 We say that 2+2=4 not because its true, but because of a zillion other
 reasons driving communication.
 Likewise, the truth of love and lust is equally obvious and foundational.
 The expression of it by John Donne is ...
 something else.
 You might say he is like a sculptor, exposing shape in rock: here the shape
 is lust: a naked truth.
 But why does a sculptor sculpt or a poet write? For just about every reason
 one can imagine, except for the naked truth of form underneath.
 And yet, what emerges is the naked form: when one sees 2+2=4, the comatose
 imagination does not wander far afield from the factual expression of a
 numeric truth.
 You are not meant to think about all these other things, you are meant
 to think about the arithmetic fact.
 The ionterpretational difficulties are about understanding signs.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And so here we arrive at the poetry of scientific papers.
 Every sentence that Levin writes: what does it mean? The comatose imagination
 is forced to search for some underlying truth.
 Well, careful, am I making the Platonic assumption that there is some underlyin
g truth? I guess I am.
 I was happy to ascribe a core, unexamined being–ness to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

four
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 when I was a child.
 I'm happy to ascribe core unexamined being–ness to love and lust.
 It's just 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

there
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, its part of who we are.
 John Donne can dance all about this all he wants.
 That he is a horny toad comes across clearly enough.
 But when Micheal Levin writes that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
Physicists are very comfortable with patterns arising from mathematical
 causes such as symmetries [86]
\emph default
.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 well, what do I do with that? Does the analogy extend? Is there some core
 unexamined being–ness anchoring the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

truth
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 of this statement? Something Levin is grasping for and trying to enunciate?
 Or perhaps I'm missing the forest for the trees? Take just one line out
 of some poem out of context, and parse it and ask: is there any 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

there
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, there? Well, hardly, its out of context.
 And so the sentences in a scientific paper.
 Out of context, is there still a core? I guess not.
 So perhaps 2+2=4 is a bad example, because it feels like there is a core
 there: something that stands on it's own, a Platonic Ideal, not requiring
 further elucidation.
 Whereas almost all other communication: verbal, pictorial – yes, there
 is some idea that the writer wishes to convey to the audience, limited
 by the writers ability to express and the audiences ability to comprehend.
 But where is that Platonic Ideal of an idea? Is it there? Does it exist?
 Did it ever exist? Will it one day come to exist? My brain, your brain
 struggles to give interpretation to ephemeral shadows.
 And like all diaphanous shadows, it is never quite clear if they are 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

really there
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fuck.
 Well, of course, I can now write a few more paragraphs on what it means
 for something to be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

really there
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Should I write these? Yes, but maybe not today.
 it would probably be more productive to engage in the external world, than
 to stare at my navel and verbalize.
 I am stumped.
 I observe myself, my thinking, my self–model of my self in the universe,
 and it melts.
 Not just with a thousand paradoxial cuts, as if one could band–aid over
 each paradox, but more like a tomato in a blender: yes there were a thousand
 cuts.
 You ain't putting that shit back together again.
 My thoughts are OK: I can function as a high–function human.
 But as a physicist–philosopher observing the universe, the mathematical,
 philosophical noosphere, its all in a blender.
 Occasionally, one can glimpse a solid chunk before it vanishes again.
 Reality is fugnuts weird.
 Much much weirder and hallucinatory than any LSD trip.
 Why am I even here? What is this place?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Later.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Levin, page 13: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

(via ingressions of these patterns [101])
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 What's 101? 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

101.
 Whitehead, A., Process and reality : an essay in cosmology.
 1978, New York: Free Press
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Hah hah.
 I assume not Alfred North Whitehead; he's dead by then.
 Unless this is some posthumous reprint.
 But the ingress of platonic reality into the physical world...
 I imagine he must have spoken of that.
 Why am I surprised? Neal Stephenson wrote the book Anatheum which is in
 large part about the ingress of Platonic Ideals into the physical universe.
 And yet still each time I encounter this idea, it is always a shock.
 Always undeniably true and still a surprise.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here's a mashup: percolation.
 If Platonic Reality is a place of unalterable facts, then we, life, the
 physical universe, are the thing that percolates through the voids.
 We seem to exist in between the facts.
 And maybe this is the solution to free will: That is, determinism consists
 of facts: 2+2=4, unalterable, inviolable, deterministic.
 but everything we do seems to be in that void in between those facts.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Where are facts located? Well, the mechanic of model theory: axioms, languages,
 theories provide anchors which can be iterated to fill a fractal space
 of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

facts
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 The finite iteration of axioms and rules provide ..
 finite things, but also one can apply this to differential equations: smooth,
 integrable systems that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

fill
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 some space of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

all possible differential equations
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

all possible solutions to those equations
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and of course, if one is rigidly pinned to one of these, one has no free
 will.
 The the constructive mechanics of model theory tells you how to create
 and talk about 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

where things are
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

: the valid sentential statements.
 They do not tell you where the spaces are.
 You can't say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

everything that is not a true statement is a false statement
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, for many reasons.
 For the present discussion, you can't do this because it blows up the idea
 of percolation and free will: free will lives in that space where things
 are not deterministic.
 Everything that is true is equivalent to everything that is deterministic:
 you cannot alter 2+2=4, it is determined.
 There's also a huge landscape of false statements: 2+2=5, for example.
 Free will must necessarily live outside of that place where things are
 deterministic.
 But ethically, it must also live in that place outside of the collection
 of all false statements.
 And it is for this reason that the law of the excluded middle must be rejected:
 Things that are true are fixed, frozen, unalterable, determinate, choice–less.
 Things that are false are just wrong.
 Free will must live in the gap between these two.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Full stop.
 Because then we hit turbulence: everything from the Borel hierarchy to
 Paul Cohen's forcing to Chaitin's oracles.
 Studying these is studying the eddies and swirls in that turbulence.
 Studying these risks getting burned up at the Cauchy horizon of knowability.
 I like my poetry.
 Don't you?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Done reading section 3 of Levin.
 Fine.
 What he says is true.
 I can gloat and say he has a naive view of dynamics, and that I can say
 so much more about this domain.
 But whatever.
 It captures the spirit of the idea.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Spirit of the idea?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Section 4 starts with a quote: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
"Computer Science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes."
 -- E.
 W.
 Dijkstra
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 But of course, the telescope is a sensory organ, a prosthetic for the mind.
 Astronomy is not possible without telescopes.
 In this diary, however, I am trying to perceive the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

spirit of the idea
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, but I have no telescope.
 I have my own mind, my faculties that I can use.
 But I have no telescope, nor microscope, which I can deploy to enhance
 my perceptive powers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, but I do, at a certain level.
 There's a rich variety of instruments available to me that can improve
 my perceptive abilities.
 There's no obvious instrument to use, to better perceive the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

spirit of the idea
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Perhaps one could say that this is the point of machine learning and AI.
 But we don't know how to use these yet.
 We have LLM's, But I haven't yet seen any way of using LLM's to somehow
 improve anything that I do or think about.
 In any domain.
 Never mind the current one, which is rather abstract, ethereal and devoid
 of other explorers.
 I can tell that I am off at the frontier, where no one ever goes.
 Perhaps this is why I am surprised when I do occasionally catch glimpses
 of other people thinking of similar things.
 But then they turn and fade away into the distance, again.
 I can perhaps use an LLMs as a telescope to spy upon these other distant
 thinkers, and bring their thoughts closer to me.
 But for what? My subject mater is not distant thinkers.
 My subject matter is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

spirits of ideas
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My mind wanders as I read Levin.
 So I have two topics: the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

here and now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 problem, and the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

spirit of ideas
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 problem.
 I've been nominally consigning free will into the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

here and now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 problem, in that free will manifests only in the present, and never in
 the past.
 But Levin reminds me of the Platonic universe.
 Stupidly he suggests that the Platonic universe has dynamics.
 Stupid stupid stupid, but what if there some inkling of truth to that?
 Here, facts like 2+2=4 are consigned to the distant past: this has always
 been true, and always will be.
 The 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

set of all differential eqns and their solutions
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 has always, uuh, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

been true
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and uhhh 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

always will be
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, for how can it ever be any other way? Every single mathematical statements
 we can make about anything mathematical is always rigidly true and unalterable.
 But where does the noosphere fit in? If we define mathematics as the collection
 of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

all true things
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 (all true mathematical statements), then what are ideas? When I try to
 talk about the spirit of an idea, is it like John Donne, about love and
 lust, or is it like a mathematician, about 2+2=4? Is that idea a Platonic
 Form, a Platonic Ideal? If it is, then it is dead, deterministic, unalterable,
 fixed.
 But if all ideas are fixed, then what the fuck are we doing here? We've
 been planted in the universe to explore a museum exhibit of pinned dead
 butterflies? Yes, some are very beautiful.
 And personally, I like doing math.
 But dies, they seem to race around with a mind of their own.
 Right? If I cannot see a butterfly clearly, it might indeed be because
 of my failing eyesight that has rendered it into a diaphanous cloud, amorphous
 and barely existing.
 But it might also be because the butterfly is dancing away.
 The spirit of an idea: is it a dead spirit, or a living spirit? Do these
 spirits dance in the here–and–now, with the rest of us?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The tension is palpable: my theory of here–and–now was intended to be physicalis
t, some mashup of relativity and quantum.
 Something that can explain why we cannot change the past, using conventional
 modes of physics communication: formulas, derivations, results, etc.
 This is very difficult; I have not been able to accomplish this am struggling
 to find a toe–hold, a hand–hold to even get started.
 But it's meant to be conventional mathematical physics.
 I haven't even started, and whammo: free will is lurking in the scenery,
 taunting and making faces at me.
 And now the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

spirit of the idea
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 makes a cameo? Yikes! What is this swamp? I am both drowning and also fighting
 alligators, while piranhas eat my neurons.
 Err, that is, eat my noosphere.
 If only it were a snake pit.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Finished section 4.
 Its strong at the start, in the middle.
 By the end, though, Levin shows his weakness in dynamical systems.
 Much of what he says 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

should be done
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 has already been done, e.g.
 by Prusinkiewicz, over at algorithmicbotany.org Flip side, I do not understand
 why Prusinkiewicz isn't much more famous and acclaimed than he is.
 So...
 OK.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Section 5.
 OK, the most interesting stuff is here.
 First up: the sorting algorithm thing.
 First blush, it comes off as a bit kooky, but for one result that piques
 my interest: when the sort algo is broken up into little agential pieces,
 and mixed into chimeric collections, then they have a propensity to cluster,
 such that similar agents operate next to one–another.
 This is important in several ways.
 First, in the sense of conventional physics and entropic forces.
 Why, exactly, should sorting agents, that sort their local region, tend
 to cluster? What's the kinematics? What's the dynamics? Is there some entropic
 force explanation or is this something else? How generic is this result?
 What is the class of systems that exhibit this behavior? Foremost: did
 this really happen, or is he mis–interpreting data and reporting on a statistic
al bubble, a freak accident? Overall, right now, to me, digging into, explaining
, understanding this result is super–important, it seems to me.
 This is a fundamental breakthrough of some kind or another.
 This is important.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Second implication is that in my work on jigsaw pieces, self–assembly was
 always assumed to just take place: if there are connectors to be connected,
 then of course they will connect.
 The idea of entropic forces blows this out of the water: It is the entropic
 forces that cause the desire to bind together.
 That cause two suitable connectors to want to connect.
 This sharpens for me the difference between the symbolic approach and the
 continuum approach.
 The symbolic approach is like saying that there are two magnetic poles,
 called N and S and N–S attract but N–N and S–S repel, and end of story
 and nothing more to it, and what kind of systems can self–assemble from
 buckets of magnetic dipoles? A cup of iron filings? Reducing all of magnetism
 to two letters N,S and then asking what can be built from a dust of dipoles
 is ...
 well, it illustrates the power of but also the deficiency of a cultish
 attachment to symbolic methods.
 The conventional continuum description of magnetic fields is the correct
 one for the magnetic fields we observe in nature.
 Well, the conclusion here is that I need to be more careful in my work
 with jigsaws, as they mask perhaps deeper continuum processes.
 Which ...
 I always knew but ...
 failed to ...
 adequately take into account? Something like that? I will have to shift
 my perspective on force, attraction, and connectability.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As I wrote that last sentence, it shot into my mind that the connector model
 is also much more refined in certain ways.
 Magnetic poles can only be N or S and the magnetic field Hamiltonian is
 a formula that writes down energy, a single number, and works to minimize
 that, and thus energy gradients are always vectorial: a single direction.
 OK, so in materials science, one find tensorial structures: stress tensors
 of various kinds, or anisotropies.
 But these are relatively simple.
 Then as one digs deeper and deeper into strange materials, one finds even
 stranger things: thistles and hooks and velcro.
 Which become hard or impossible to describe with continuum mechanics.
 And so this is where, perhaps, labelled connectors on jigsaws show their
 true strength: the labelled connectors can have a broad range of labels,
 and of mating sexualities.
 They are not constrained to heterosexual N–S mating the way magnets are.
 (And I'm saying that the only thing that simple Hamiltonians are capable
 of is hetero N–S mating, in general.
 Well, anyway, its clear that I need to spend more time exploring the continuum
 side of the jigsaw paradigm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To conclude: that whack–weirdo stunt with sorting algorithms raises many
 interesting and important questions about entropic forces.
 This is also something I will need to investigate.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK Next, in section five.
 This subsection: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
Objects vs.
 patterns as beneficiaries of forms: blurring the distinction between thoughts
 and thinkers
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 this I also find inspiring.
 There are several takes that spring to mind: Big Bang cosmology kind of
 makes it clear that the particles in the universe are the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

data
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, are the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

thoughts
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and that the (simple) laws of physics are the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

thinkers
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 doing the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

thinking
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

 but in a sense, it is the thoughts that count.
 What we cherish and find venerable are the atoms we are made out of, and
 not the laws of physics that make those atoms go round.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The other take is, of course, this diary.
 The active me, alive here–and–now, a busy ball of activity at the keyboard,
 is transferring itself into the dead cold past as quickly as I can type,
 so that these words can be frozen into some bit–pattern in the universe,
 hopefully encoded ..
 forever? Well, maybe not, but a long time.
 Odd that I can stamp myself onto the physical universe, and it stays there.
 I can carve my initials into a rock.
 But where is me? Am I these words, in the end, and nothing more? Because
 this typed encoding will outlive me? What's really more alive, me, who
 will soon die, or these words that will have some echoing cause and effect
 decades or centuries or millennia into the future? Maybe all time? Its
 the data man.
 Thanks to Levin for reminding me of this.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
End of section 5.
 Well, I guess I'm as radical as they come.
 I'm not sure what to make of this.
 Perhaps it is that there are more radicals out there than one might suppose,
 and also that the radicalist views have already permeated society.
 Although I hated Godel Escher Bach ...
 I hated it because I felt I already knew of everything in there and more
 ...
 I was already far more radical than what was in there ...
 it was also one of many popularizations of radicalist ideas.
 I have not read Tegmarks books ...
 not interested, mostly because I suspect he'll just talk about things I
 already know ...
 but his books are written for a popular audience: best–seller lists and
 the book–reading public.
 So Levin's ides are already out there, in the wild, and so what if a few
 Buddhists cannot wrap their minds around them.
 Perhaps the more serious critique is that academic biologists aren't radical
 enough.
 And that is indeed a critique, and a loss.
 But also: my personal encounters with academics who are physicists and
 mathematicians indicate that a vast number of them are quite stupid, narrow–min
ded and uninformed.
 So stupidity is hardly limited to biologists.
 But then, among them are also the ones who are brilliant.
 If I'm a 98th percentile kind of guy, its clear that most academics are
 97th percentile.
 But among them are those in the 99th percentile, as well.
 And they are actually a crowd: not just one or a dozen or a hundred, but
 perhaps a good bit more.
 Hard to say.
 Levin's paper as a critique of narrow–mindedness in academia stands.
 I have no clue, though, if a call to arms works.
 Maybe it does.
 It wouldn't have a cliched name, if it didn't work.
 Beats me.
 Whatever.
 Time to finish reading section 6.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK, here's the bubble–sort algo thingy:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
113.
 Zhang, T., A.
 Goldstein, and M.
 Levin, Classical sorting algorithms as a model of morphogenesis: Self-sorting
 arrays reveal unexpected competencies in a minimal model of basal intelligence.
 Adaptive Behavior, 2024.
 0(0): p.
 10597123241269740.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Excellent page number there.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As to radicalist views: they are useful, only insofar as they are useful.
 I have some idea on here–and–now that is radical, but I can't turn it into
 a formula, and so, in that sense, it is useless.
 This holds true more generally in the capitalist world: People are willing
 to pay money for auto mechanics.
 For scientists, not so much.
 Other social systems sponsor scientists.
 Workable ideas are also subject to some sort of economic competition: an
 idea that allows me to publish a paper is more valuable than one that does
 not.
 An idea that allows me to publish a paper, be recognized as brilliant,
 and have the side–effect of automatically fixing automobiles is even better.
 I like Levin's ideas, but they may be low value, if they do not allow other
 scientists to do great work.
 We shall see.
 The revolution will not be televised.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Section six: bullet points: OMG.
 He's recapitulating ideas from the 1980's.
 What ever happened to chaos theory? Did it die on the vine? Why is everyone
 so ignorant of what it actually said and accomplished? (Including Levin?)
 Or is just Levin who is ignorant of what has been done? Or is it just impossibl
e to have an accurate world–view far outside your field? Levin is clearly
 not stupid.
 But he's not aware of the state of the art.
 Well, and if he's not aware, then what of the mid–level biology academic?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This one resonates: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
...
 in which agential patterns seek embodiments, as a complement to the current
 view in which physical bodies participate in a search of passive patterns
 from which they can benefit.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 That is actually radical.
 Clearly, humans seek to upscale themselves.
 What's the simplest agential pattern that does the same? The upscaling
 that the transhumanists want to do is clearly different from the upscaling
 that bacteria do, upon hitting a food source.
 Two very different notions: the later ideas and replicates, the former
 wishes to conquer a larger territory of the noosphere.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So that's how to phrase it? What kind of agent wants to conquer territory
 in the noosphere? i.e.
 wishes to learn, and upon learning, manifesting in the physical world so
 as to learn even better and more? That sentence, now, that's radical.
 That's as radical as I've gotten in a while.
 Huh.
 Shit.
 We'll get back to you on that one.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And then Levin drops back to being disappointing: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
...our current environment offers plentiful opportunity to detect alien minds
 in our midst...
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 The people who talk about temes (technological memes) have already noted
 that we have lots of alien minds in our midst: we call them corporations.
 We call them 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

nicotine
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, a neurotransmitter that is also a 400–year–old multi–billion dollar industry.
 We have WWI, an alien intelligence, an industrial machine that slaughtered
 young men until it literally ran out of young men to slaughter.
 We have it again with Putin–Ukraine: deeply harmful alien intelligences
 that walk among us, that we cannot control, that we barely even seem able
 to perceive for what they are.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Then new lows: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
What degree of infinity best describes the totality its contents?
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 here's a man who has never encountered set theory.
 His head will explode when we show him those guys arguing about V=L and
 the axioms of large cardinals.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, whatever.
 Levin is right, of course.
 Are his insights useful? I dunno.
 I did not learn anything I did not already know, but I did take the opportunity
 to write this diary entry, and in so doing, I did uncover some new ideas.
 Which I've already managed to forget.
 I'll get back to them.
 Later.
 I hope.
 So reading that paper was like watching some invigorating sci–fi movie.
 I'm invigorated.
 But then, I've also been there, done that.
 I still face the problem: what do I do now?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
28 March 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Just read about the Boolean Rectangle Problem.
 Mind–blowing, in a way.
 The formulation of it as a function over a grid, asking how to populate
 the grid with ones in such a way that the function is identically zero
 ...
 for some reason, this tickles something in me.
 I'm imagining a piece of paper with four holes punched in at, and no matter
 how I slide it around on the grid, at most three of the holes light up.
 A different metaphor that tickles me is how many ones can one hide in plain
 sight? Vaguely like the n–queens problem, where you ask: how densely can
 I place queens so that they cannot see one–another? I never liked the n–queens
 problem, but the hiding–in–plain–sight problem is interesting because it
 vibes the same way as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

how do fractals fill up space?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Now, (most) conventional fractals are highly non–uniform: scaling means
 that there will be large areas which are empty.
 An exception is the Hilbert curve, which is space–filling with Hausdorff
 dimension two: its 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

uniform
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in a sense: equal density, everywhere.
 The Boolean rectangle problem feels like it will also be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

uniform
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in this way: The maximal solutions will not have large empty areas: they
 can't because if they did, you could put some ones in there.
 Uhh, right? Unless the ones end up creating rectangle somewhere? So, for
 the maximal boolean rectangle problem, what is the maximal empty rectangle?
 I'm trying to put my finger on why this tickles my fancy.
 It does, because it feels analogous to something important and generic
 about the structure of err, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the noosphere
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, but I can't quite manifest that analogy.
 It's just this vague gut sense.
 Curious.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, I guess I never really thought about Boolean functions before.
 Curious.
 I mean, the Ising model is a specific Boolean function.
 Maybe I'm just behind the curve on stat mech.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
1 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm in love with my words.
 I just posted the below to bluesky:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Michael Burns @michaelburns.bsky.social · 3d Not to be weird but aspects of
 the neoliberal project, that’s been built and supported by the Democratic
 Party, have eradicated many of the mechanisms by which the people are able
 to form and exert political pressure.
 And this was on purpose.
 And now we’re screwed.
 Marty the Liberal Voter @makhuit.bsky.social · 3d Well ya, all your governments
 have had horrible sides to them.
 So I guess you voted republican.
 That or you are super tone deaf and don’t understand that none fascist
 have to put our differences aside for now to fight a great evil (if you
 are republican I guess it’s not evil to you, it’s saintly.) Linas Vepstas
 @linas.org · 2d Marty, please look up the definition of neoliberalism.
 Ronald Reagan was an ultra-neoliberal, as was Thatcher.
 Every American president since has been neoliberal.
 I have not watched Canadian politics, but I will bet that *every* Canadain
 PM and President for the last 40 years has been neoliberal.
 Marty the Liberal Voter @makhuit.bsky.social · 1h So I guess you don’t vote
 then? if they are all the same just throw in the towel and say they are
 all neoliberal.
 Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 55m This is not about me.
 This is about knowing the dictionary definition of "Neoliberal".
 The only politicians that I know of who are not Neoliberals are in the
 EU, and they're called "Social Democrats".
 But even then, they're divided.
 And even then, Social Democrats mostly lose elections.
 So ...
 Marty the Liberal Voter @makhuit.bsky.social · 50m So therefore this is completel
y irrelevant information.
 If all politicians (except for a couple Europeans) are neoliberal then
 it doesn’t matter who is a so called neoliberal.
 So do you therefore Abstain from voting or you just throw away your vote
 on someone you know won’t get elected? Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 42m I
 don't understand what you are asking.
 Do you want an explanation of how Parliamentary elections work in the EU?
 Or is this about how the US system works? In the US, any vote that is not
 for a Democrat or a Republican is a throw-away vote.
 People who vote for 3rd parties in the US are stupid.
 Marty the Liberal Voter @makhuit.bsky.social I was just asking if you vote
 or if you just abstain? If you do vote, how do you pick between all these
 neoliberals? April 1, 2025 at 9:16 PM Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 27m I vote.
 Most Americans vote.
 There are always differences between candidates.
 There's always "the guy you hate" and the "I hope they win" candidate.
 I don't think Neoliberalism was ever a campaign issue in the US.
 It was invented in about 1978, in that Harvard airline deregulation paper,
 and ..
 1/2 Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 23m ...
 and sure, some politicians said "deregulating the airlines was a bad idea"
 but they were a minority.
 Jimmy Carter started it rolling.
 I think he deregulated trucking, too, and Ronald Reagan continued doing
 it, on an even bigger scale.
 Then the Democrats eliminated all the Roosevelt era ...
 2/3 Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 21m ...
 up until about 1983-ish there were still a lot of Roosevelt-era "New Deal"
 thinkers in the Democratic party.
 But they were really old, close to retirement, and the youngsters did not
 want any of that stuff.
 Pushed them out.
 Socialism was a dirty word.
 Everyone wants to be a rich capitalist.
 Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 17m And it made sense.
 In the 1970's, Americans were psychologically depressed.
 Vietnam War.
 Oil Embargo.
 Iran Hostage crisis.
 High crime.
 Paint peeling off of houses because no one painted them any more.
 The NYC ghetto.
 The Chicago ghetto.
 The Neoliberal idea of getting wildly rich was very appealing.
 Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 13m And it worked.
 Between 1976 and 2024 America got really really rich.
 But around 2010 people started to notice the money was flowing to billionaires.
 That's because Neoliberal deregulation means ...
 no regulations.
 So of course the money flows that way.
 Its a side-effect of neoliberal policy.
 Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 9m And around 2010 many Americans started noticing
 that sometimes capitalism is quite toxic.
 But no one wants to get off the gravy train that is capitalism.
 So what do you do to fix it? No one ha a clue, except maybe "tax the rich".
 And so here we are.
 Toxic capitalism exploding into naked fascism.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
4 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I am reading 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

On the Biology of a Large Language Model
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and some idea pops in my mind so lets me blurble on about it.
 This catches my eye: 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

One reason models are difficult to interpret is that their neurons are typically
 polysemantic – that is, they perform many different functions that are
 seemingly unrelated.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 So OK, ah ha! Well, we always knew this was the case, but saying it out
 loud somehow makes it clear.
 And this of course leads to the brilliant idea behind this paper (and don't
 get me wrong, this is a brilliant paper and I think it's a break–through,
 watershed moment.
 I think.
 Maybe I'm naive.
 Maybe I haven't finished digesting it yet.
 I might be wrong but so far it knocks my socks off.) 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
we build a replacement model ...
 based on a cross-layer transcoder (CLT) architecture ...
 which is trained to replace the model’s MLP neurons with features, sparsely
 active “replacement neurons” that often represent interpretable concepts.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Bingo.
 That's the magic.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So the hold–on wait–a–sec thought that made me stop and write this is ...
 how do we sharpen this? How do we look at a polysemantic node, and determine
 how to classify different neuron firings into, well, classes? Group together
 similar firings into distinct buckets?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Of course I would think this: classification and discrimination is what
 I've been trying to do since forever with the 'learn' project.
 I was trying to do it with counting, which suffers from being hard to paralleli
ze.
 And so OK...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hmm.
 Well, I probably could parallelize counting, I just never made the effort.
 Should I? I fear the amount of time this would take.
 Boiling the ocean, again.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Also, I could fiddle with a number of different clustering algorithms.
 This I already identified as an important step, from the experience of
 doing genealogy on the familysearch.org site.
 There is very much a need for a single–shot hierarchical comparison of
 similarity: not just to identify possible genealogical relationships, but
 also to compare similar file–system directories, something I need for my
 file–system maintenance and de–corruption project.
 Writing similarity and clustering algos by hand is ..
 again time consuming.
 I suppose I could try vibe coding but I dunno.
 I digress.
 I need to create a position paper on vibe coding.
 But a different point here is that perhaps trans–layer encoders (CLT) are
 suitable for clustering.
 I don;t understand them, yet, but there's some promise:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So the way I've done clustering before was with that voting and membership
 club idea.
 And it seems to work.
 And once membership is granted, it is actually performed, on the spot.
 It is granted.
 Then the next update is performed.
 What the CLT thing is putting into my head is that perhaps the changes
 to the lowest layers never need to actually be made.
 The clustering is done at a different layer.
 Well, this was supposed to be the idea behind data frames.
 In practice, incoming set lookup in frames is slowwww, which hurts graph
 traversal performance.
 Can this be fixed? Don't know, haven't sat down to look.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, can I instead implement the voting and membership thing as.
 well, a compute network: some weight matrices, some sigma sharpening accept–rej
ect filters? The algo I implemented already feels very weight–matrix–and–sigma–l
ike, but I did not implement it like that; I implemented it as olde–fashioned
 serial–execution code.
 My bad.
 Better late than never? Again, the question: should I go back and try again?
 Do I have time for this, or has the clock run out?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, today's to–do list:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Write up the idea for hierarchical similarity comparison in greater detail.
 I want to do this, I have a project I need it for, and talked to Adam Vandervor
st and he would like to see the pseudocode.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
I should try to do this write–up as if it were some transformer–y weight–matrix-
y multi–layer–y thing.
 Which it kind of is.
 Ideally with sparse activation.
 It would be a true challenge to attempt to do this.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
I need to study CLT.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
I need to develop a strategy for sparse, mono–semantic nodes.
 I've already started walking that way, but never quite got there.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hot takes.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

First, we examine the features’ visualizations to interpret them, and group
 them into categories (“supernodes”).
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Is this manual, or automatic?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
one feature activates on various landmarks in central Texas
\emph default
...
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

 The feature is a list of propositions, but its clear that the propositions
 are all linked to the word Austin.
 The actual feature is thus the prepositional phrase, or perhaps (in link–gramma
r terms) the linkage.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
So I am reading through the example sentences that trigger certain features,
 and under 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

For example, one feature promotes responding with a variety of U.S.
 state capitals.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 We find this charmer: 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

there is some sort of mental illness infecting our politicians! Perhaps
 that possibilit
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 So someone typed that into Anthropic's Claude, and it made the cut of examples.
 From context, I can't tell if its a MAGA person asking about insane Democrats,
 or if its a normal person asking about insane Trumptards.
 But there it is: a question people are exploring with Claude.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
5 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I am so easily distracted.
 Went to state capital to see the protests.
 Disappointingly small turnout.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Came home, read this article: 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
America’s National Security Wonderland (American Affairs Journal.
 Spring 2025) By Malcom Kyeyune https://americanaffairsjournal.org/2025/02/americ
as-national-security-wonderland/ Quote: "
\emph on
The cancer eating away at the U.S.
 military is of a similar genus to that which once ate away at the Red Army;
 the oblivious and out-of-touch responses coming from elites inside Washington
 aren’t particularly different from the attitudes of Soviet elites of days
 past.
\emph default
" 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Yowza.
 True.
 I believe every word of it.
 And so here we are.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Kyeyune is writing some bangers.
 Reading this, now: Planet of the Grifters (American Affairs Journal.
 Summer 2021 / Volume V, Number 2) By Malcom Kyeyune.
 https://americanaffairsjournal.org/2021/05/planet-of-the-grifters/ ...
 not sure what to make of this.
 OK, so fine: we are over–producing college students.
 But what kind of jobs are they suppose to have? The economy is not structured
 to employ the surplus.
 And what about the 2/3rds that don't go to college, and cannot actually
 run anything? How do they obtain income? The educated left feel socially
 screwed, economically screwed.
 The uneducated right are de facto actually screwed.
 How does this work out, moving into the future? I dunno.
 There are all of these accelerationist thinkers, who seem to be on to something
, but they don't know how to connect the dots from here to there.
 Musk is an accelerationist, but his modus operendi is to destroy to create.
 It's not clear how the phoenix rises from the ashes, though.
 Meanwhile, the destruction is quite real.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Again: can I riff on these essays? Perhaps I could.
 I don't see much point in it.
 Or perhaps, I'm just not interested.
 I could rationalize myself into thinking that there is a point to it all:
 some vague idea of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

solving the problems of humanity
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 or 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

tackling the hard issues
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 or something like that.
 But when I write about physics (i.e.
 the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

here and now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 question, or the quantum question(s), I do so because because these questions
 both nag me, and I find them interesting, and I have some hope of possibly
 making progress on them, because of decades of training.
 My training in socio–economic or political issues is considerably shallower.
 What could I add to what Kyeyune says, that isn't already obvious to someone
 somewhere? What would I accomplish by articulating and thinking about it
 here, in this private diary? I see no pay–off.
 I could also analyze some OK–ish math paper, and for what? I guess it does
 not scratch any itch that I have.
 So, this second Kyeyune paper is more of an interesting data–point; file
 away under 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

over–production of the elites
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and maybe one day it will act as a support for something, but I don't know
 what.
 Anyway, not worthy further commentary at this point.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 Next paper: Cargo Cults and the Disorganization of America By James McElroy
 (Spring 2025 / Volume IX, Number 1) https://americanaffairsjournal.org/2025/02/c
argo-cults-and-the-disorganization-of-america/ Hmm.
 OK, either I'm tired, or this is not that good an essay.
 I've vaguely tried writing socio–political essays myself, half–heartedly,
 and think back on those, and compare: is the stuff I wrote of higher quality?
 No.
 If I tried hard, would it have been of vaguely comparable quality? Perhaps.
 I've learned a thing or two by writing: getting good at being a wordcel
 means ...
 writing, and I've been doing a lot of that, recently.
 It has liberated me from some stifled, stifling thought patterns, and certainly
 has allowed more free–range thinking and better self–expression.
 Or so it seems, from the current vantage point.
 Then again, maybe I was smarter when I was younger.
 Then again, just like practicing sports makes you better at sports, so
 also practicing writing makes you better at writing.
 I dunno.
 At any rate, I think I can confidently say, that essay is not as good as
 what one might read in the New York Review of Books.
 Alas.
 But I haven't finished reading it yet, I should go do that.
 The break here is cause I have ADHD when something does not excite my imaginati
on.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh crap, is that what ADHD is? The present (intellectual) stimulus is just
 not very interesting, so the mind wanders? Ooooh.
 OK.
 That makes sense.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The James McElroy essay seems to try to have it both ways: shitting on meritocra
cy, and then lauding talent.
 What? That's bullshit.
 He makes some good points, but there's some underlying bullshit that he's
 trying to repackage.
 He complains about cargo cult thinking, but then shits on science.
 Seriously, duude.
 You are revealing yourself to be just plain stupid, despite being widely
 read.
 How did we get there? I'm starting to kind of hate this guy.
 Well, then I get to the end, he redeems himself a bit.
 It's a mish–mash of observations, sometimes illustrating points clearly,
 sometimes masking mis–understanding and some kind of bitterness.
 Perhaps McElroy is one of the over–produced elites, feeling as though he
 should have succeeded in life, didn't quite, and is grinding what remains
 of his axe with these essays? The observations are mostly good.
 Some cuts are sharp.
 The taint of right–wing bullshido is strong.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Twenty minutes to midnight.
 Now what will I do? I usually don't go to bed before midnight.
 I should break that habit.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
7 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm losing the plot.
 America is self–destructing.
 Thinking about AGI, already difficult, is somehow even harder.
 This is a bit like 9/11 where one kind of wandered around in a daze, wondering
 about nothing in particular, wondering what's going on.
 Not conducive to strategic activity.
 Maybe I should trim my to-do list..
 Yes.
 OK.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
8 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lulled myself to sleep thinking about 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

here–and–now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Sets of measure zero that are branch points in classical dynamics.
 Phase locking.
 Turbulence.
 I imagine a branch–point at each swirl in a turbulent flow.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
While reading below, I just realized that here–and–now must be Markovian,
 in that all unclosed quantum events are by definition in the here and now,
 and not in the past.
 This also means that the past cannot affect the future: everything that
 affects the future is in there here and now.
 The word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Markovian
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is a statement about probabilities and information flow.
 I realize that I do have never seen a good definition of quantum information
 flow.
 I'm not sure if this is a deep realization or shallow: the Schrodinger
 equation is first–order in time, and thus satisfies the Markovian property.
 The wave eqn.
 is second–order.
 But this is a classical eqn; the terms in the Lagrangian are (squares of)
 first–order terms.
 Curiously, all this is given lie to, by the need for here–and–now to somehow
 be magically relativistically invariant (viz.
 Hafele–Keating did not arrive some hundred nanoseconds in the future, nor
 in the past; they rejoined here–and–now, in the present.) and so I don't
 understand how time derivatives work in such a situation.
 Somehow, maybe Markovian–ness is somehow more clear? Hmm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It's vaguely irritating that there seems to be a lot of work in string theory,
 quantum gravity, etc.
 showing everything from CPT–symmetry breakage to Lorentz invariance breakage,
 to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

maze states
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in brane collisions and what–not.
 Complex stuff showing unusual, novel behaviors and configurations.
 This suggests that if I want to develop a theory for here–and–now, I will
 need to perform deep dives into arcane math to make forward progress.
 And in the end, maybe this will ultimately be neccessary.
 Yet ...
 why am I so entrenched in exploring it from a naive point of view? Am I
 stupid, suffering from bad psychology? Perhaps.
 So it goes.
 Alas.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But I can articulate this: There's no indication that biology or nature
 require anything beyond electromagnetism plus quantum.
 Maybe, just maybe, for the sake of closure w/ cosmology, the primordial
 neutrinos need to be considered.
 But this is a stretch: although needed in principle, in practice, these
 should be completely ignorable.
 The evolution of brains by nature does not require cosmological considerations.
 Single–digit electron–volt chemistry is all we need.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The confusing part is the status of special relativity.
 Quantum chemistry in a Newtonian background might be enough to describe
 tigers and antelopes, but here–and–now has to also be a coherent theory
 of wave–function collapse and the indeterminism of future states, and that
 seems to be entangled with relativity.
 Or should I say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

screw it, thinking about it in newtownian background does not make it any
 easier.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 And I guess it doesn't given that so far, I am unable to write down any
 equations...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Someone sent me this: The Information Theory of Individuality.
 David Krakauer, Nils Bertschinger, Eckehard Olbrich, Nihat Ay, Jessica
 C.
 Flack https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.2447 Sentences that capture my attention:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
The measurements are then grouped in a principled way ...
 Some of these partitions will continue to behave in a coordinated fashion
 over characteristic intervals of time.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 This is a very very basic notion, but its one I struggle with.
 In the 3D visual field, detecting long–lasting correlated events is easy:
 our visual cortex does this quite well.
 Doing this in full abstractness is hard: this is the clustering and similarity
 problem I struggle with.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

that individuals are best thought of in terms of dynamical proccesses and
 not as stationary objects
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Oh.
 Well, OK.
 Yes, I've been ignoring this.
 It's obvious, now that it's mentioned.
 And yet ...
 a large part of pattern recognition is discerning patterns in a fixed context:
 e.g.
 in the past, in a historical record.
 A fossil bone is de facto a stationary object.
 Perhaps a large collection of fossil bones can be arranged and studied
 as a dynamical system, but that system is static.
 So, OK, yes, recognizing individuals *in the present* is a task of looking
 at groupings in a time–varying dynamical systems context.
 But more generally, the varying parameter is not time, and the parameter
 dependence is not time–like.
 The grouping that is a thunder–cloud hail–storm is not so much time–like,
 as it is pressure and temperature–like.
 The grouping occurs in only certain regimes, and not others.
 Whatevver.
 This paper is about 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

biological individuals
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, so my commentary has no bearing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
Informational individuals
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Whelp.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
The quantity 
\begin_inset Formula $I\left(S_{n+1};S_{n}\right)$
\end_inset

 has been called autonomy 
\begin_inset Formula $A^{*}$
\end_inset

.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Oh.
 That's interesting.
 So 
\begin_inset Formula $S_{n}$
\end_inset

 is the state of the system at time 
\begin_inset Formula $n$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $I\left(a;b\right)$
\end_inset

 is the mutual information between 
\begin_inset Formula $a,b$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

the following relationship is obtained between the measures of autonomy,
 dependency and closure
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 I'm getting a little lost because I don't like their notation.
 It's ambiguous.
 They really need to have used additional grouping parenthesis.
 I like the general intent, though.
 Ugh.
 All of pages 10,11 is impenetrable due to their poor notation.
 I think they're on to something, but the failure to define their notation
 is a disaster.
 I don't have time to untangle it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
By incrementally titrating the system/environment boundary (inclusion and
 exclusion criteria) we expand the individual to be the largest set of processes
 which upon further addition is no better at predicting its future than
 the previous largest set.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 These are sexy words, but seem unrealistic to me, except in some simple,
 abstract theoretical settings.
 The computational problem of predicting behavior becomes rapidly intractable,
 once the systems get large.
 It would have been sexier if the formulas were clearer, and then we could
 ignore the computability/intractability issues...
 but jeez.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
I wrote two paragraphs of summary in the Readings–List file in this directory.
 That's my 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

formal review
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Post–script: one of the failures of the paper above, and the paper below,
 is to realize that the metric distance between individuals is effectively
 an ultrametric.
 Yeah, the information–theory perspective is nice, it provides a way to
 distinguish the individual from the environment.
 But more profoundly, we want to measure the distance between individuals,
 and this is where we discover the ultrametric property.
 Individuals live in deep, deep wells of isolation.
 Yes, the interact with the environment, but it is only when you start looking
 at the interactions between individuals that you notice how isolated they
 are.
 This seems to be fundamental, and is a property ignored with great theoretical
 peril.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
9 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next up on the agenda: All intelligence is collective intelligence Falandays
 J.
 Benjamin, Roope Oskari Kaaronen, Cody Moser, Wiktor Rorot, Joshua Tan,
 Vishwanath Varma, Tevin Williams, Mason Youngblood Journal of Multiscale
 Neuroscience Vol 2 no 1 169-191 (2023) https://doi.org/10.56280/1564736810
 https://researchportal.helsinki.fi/en/publications/all-intelligence-is-collective
-intelligence
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Like above: bullet points that are hot takes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\emph on
Collective intelligence, broadly conceived...
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Duh.
 When I was in school, we called it 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

sociology
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, so what the heck? What was broken about sociology, that we now need a
 different name for this? Is it because sociology failed to be broad enough
 to include ant–hills? OK then.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
If it can be seen that mechanisms of intelligence at every level of 
\emph default
analysis are best understood as collective behaviors, what is left to qualify
 as individual intelligence?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 OK.
 This sentence says that I should speed–read or just skim the rest of the
 paper.
 The whole idea of an ultra–metric is that the thoughts in my brain are
 very very very distant from those of yours.
 My brain sits in a deep deep well of isolation, and so does yours, and
 the stuff that gets across, over the barriers is miniscule compared to
 what goes on in my head.
 So yes, there is a collective intelligence inn human society, but it is
 composed of very loosely connected individual intelligences.
 Social media is making these connections fatter and tighter, but the isolation
 of individuals remains truly profound.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
These changes to collectives are typically associated with high densities
 and patchiness of resources, where coming together allows individuals to
 disperse across larger distances and forage more efficiently (Nauta et
 al., 2022).
 This is suggestive of evolution favoring the switch between individual
 and collective intelligence based on the ecological context, allowing species
 to persist in different conditions.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 OK.
 So, this is a phase transition, where the parameter is some kind of patchiness
 or volatility.
 So, in calm situations, with abundance of food, individualism is fine.
 In stress situations, where there are large food (resources) deserts (in
 time or in space) separating dollops of concentrated food/resource availability
, then collective behavior is advantageous.
 Also predation threat.
 So *if* I had a mathematical model of agency, then I could study collective
 behavior in that model.
 But I don't so I can't.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
To summarize this section, collective intelligence in non–human animals
 is a highly diverse phenomenon,
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 In other words, the landscape of agentic behavior is filigreed with first
 and second–order phase transitions all over the place.
 This contradicts the conventional mean–field results in high dimensions.
 So e.g.
 Ising model is described by mean–field results in 4 or more dimensions,
 and has 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

interesting
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 behavior in 2D.
 But agentic systems...
 Drawing the analogy is hard, because different agents do not exist along
 different 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

dimensions
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

: the space of kinds of agents is not a euclidean space.
 It instead has the the (xx?) topology, as used for describing classes of
 algorithms.
 The space is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

high–dimensional
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, but ...
 argh.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
compound intelligences ...
 expanding individual organisms’ computational boundary, allowing them to
 process information referring to more distant events, both in time and
 space.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 ...
 preachin' to the3 choir, my man, preachin' to the choir.
 This is an exciting idea.
 Obvious, as it were, I'll grab it hook–line–n–sinker.
 The heck: I'll even claim that I've had this idea before, myself, just
 never bother to have verbalized it.
 Perhaps I know this idea from reading sci–fi as a child, and here it is
 again, in a scientific journal as an adult, being proposed by respectable
 scientists.
 So over the decades, the forum has changed.
 Has the utility changed? Seems like it has not.
 We've enshrined sci–fi ideas into science without actually making tangible
 progress.
 Do we have tools for measuring this? Manipulating it? Building exploring,
 advancing it? Imagine we did: it all slips very rapidly into some post–human
 conception of being–ness.
 The ecological landscape is mind–boggling.
 And this is what I struggle with here: everything is mind–boggling.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
This shows that morphogenesis is not a simple implementation of a pre-set
 recipe (of a form ‘move cell X distance Y in the direction Z’), but rather
 that cells react to their environment in a way that is appropriate, even
 if the circumstances widely differ from normal.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 I am utterly flabbergasted why the work of Prusinkiewicz is not better
 known.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

phase transition
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Seven pages in, the phrase appears.
 Good.
 I haven't seen 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

utrametric
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 yet, but overall, this is shaping up to be a nice paper.
 They're reaching all the correct conclusions, per my personal world–view.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Interlude.
 Chronological order, but not conceptual order with above bullet points.
 My mind is wandering.
 ADHD while reading above.
 Anthropic principle.
 Math as a filigree of true but immutable statements.
 The past as a collection of immutable events.
 Oracles highlight that Turing halting problems can be encoded as relatively
 low–degree algebraic varieties.
 In some sense, the math that is directly accessible to us consists of the
 collection of statements that proof systems can prove (Coq, HO, ...) and halting
 problems are unprovable.
 So is these where non–determinism is anchored? Is there some freedom of
 choice available to systems that exist at the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

oracular
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 layer? Is physical reality that thing that exists at the oracular layer?
 Is the collection of physical alternatives (in the partition function)
 isomorphic to the choices available at the oracular layer? Viz: the platonic
 existence of mathematics is frozen; here–and–now is a freezing wave–front
 moving through the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

space
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 of indeterminate 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

stuff
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Gah.
 I want to read more about Chaitin's results, and the large cardinal axioms
 and etc.
 And when exactly will I do this, when I am so easily distracted?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So now, let me do a Michael Levin to the string landscape: what is the collectio
n of algebraic structures that encode turning–undecidable problems as collection
s of differential eqns? Which of these collections are minimal?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Taken to heart, though, this suggests that any digital software system can't
 be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

actually alive
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 or 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

actually intelligent
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 unless it is in the undecidable class.
 But this is a very low bar.
 It's also paradoxial: the system is deterministic, and yet unpredictable.
 This is a hard nut to crack.
 Something is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

hiding in there
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, but I don't know what rock to search under.
 Whatever.
 Later.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Back to the original programming:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
Each region of the brain is now thought to be involved in a multitude of
 processes, and coordinates with different partners depending upon the context,
 forming temporary “functional networks” ...This process is best understood
 as a form of self–organization, in that the best functional network for
 a task or context comes online through distributed interactions, rather
 than by virtue of a central executive that assembles the best neural partners
 after assessing a situation.
 Indeed, it would be nonsensical to suggest that such a task could be accomplish
ed by a central executive, in that it would assume that the central executive
 somehow knows the nature of the task to be accomplished; in other words,
 it would require a homunculus.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 This speaks for itself.
 I have nothing to add.
 Other than that this brings into sharper relief the task I've been facing
 with the sensori–motor work.
 There, I was trying to create descriptions of sensory and motor systems,
 but who writes those descriptions? The homunculus.
 And how are systems assembled? Well don't actually want random assembly/mutatio
n a la MOSES knob–turning.
 Instead, want assembly guided by ...
 errm ...
 well, some DL–NN–ish structure, but that just relocates the homunculus
 to the DL–NN.
 Hmm.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Along these lines, proponents of “Neural Darwinism” (Edelman, 1993) and
 related views suggest that brain development, and intelligence more generally,
 can be understood as analogous to the evolution of a species through variation
 and selection.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Yes, but ...
 Natural selection optimizes for 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

fitness
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and conventional machine learning optimizes some 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

utility function
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 What is the fitness function for the brain? Sure, perhaps the neurons are
 competing, but what are they competing for? Are they trying to build the
 largest possible organized structure, until it collapses? So, self–organized
 criticality? So, basically, build–baby–build the biggest most complex structure
 possible, until it collapses due to incorrect ...
 uhh ..
 perception of external stimuli? Until it fails to accurately portray the
 world in some way? This is certainly algorithmically conceivable.
 But how would the brain do this?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
the intelligence of brains is due not to precisely designed neural circuits
 that implement specific computations, but instead due to an intrinsic capacity
 for collections of neurons to spontaneously organize in service of survival
 of the group.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Oh OK.
 This amplifies upon the above.
 But what does 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

survival
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 here mean? What constitutes a successful organization, and what constitutes
 an unsuccessful one? When I sit here and think, I might get an idea and
 then go 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

nah, bad idea
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 so there's some executive that rejects bad ideas.
 So I am the homunculus that punishes good ideas, or not (and am in turn
 punished by base economic reality, love interests, the high of social interacti
on.
 Or, in this case, the reward for thinking.
 So is this the feedback loop? Some DNA encodes for dopamine highs, or some
 other neurotransmitter–pleasure feedback, and so when I think, and I get
 a long sequence of complex ideas that seem to pass a filter for self–consistenc
y and coherence, I am rewarded with a high for having achieved this large–scale
 thought–pattern.
 This requires some mechanism for determining the logical consistency of
 my structure of thoughts.
 Logical is too strong a word for it – a good–enough intuitive sense that
 my current thought patterns are coherent and are 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

going somewhere
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Or, at least, a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

flow state
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Then things like writers block, or frustration at the inability to move
 forward, these are punished, and the thought structure collapses.
 So again, this is tinged as some kind of self–organized criticality.
 
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Itemize
But I struggle with 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

conscious me
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

: much earlier I wrote that conscisous–me is presented with a menu of thought–ch
oices, and I only have to select.
 That make me into a homunculus in charge of thought.
 But is instead, conscious me is just an unstable assemblage of whatever
 brick–a–brack got stacked up in a semi–coherent fashion, well, that's OK,
 too.
 I suppose.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
How does this work in the presence of environmental stimulus? I'm presented
 with audio–visual stimulus ...
 structures build up, and then collapse.
 While bike–riding, I get plenty of visual stimulus, but approx none of
 that is intellectual thinking, none of it resembles what I do here while
 writing.
 It's also mundane, forgotten, non note–worthy.
 Well I did give the finger to a cybertruck: I remember that.
 And I can imagine remember this or another pebble in the road: I have a
 good visual memory; snapshots are committed to memory.
 But these are rapidly changing, and do not tower large or complex.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
My sons do a lot of video–gaming.
 Is their experience akin to bike riding? Perhaps with more sophisticated
 motor–muscular responses? The point here is rapid assembly and disassembly
 of transient structures from visual stimulus.
 At the meta–level, something also notices a common recurring theme in those
 structures: so, perception is recursive: not only does this or that visual
 filter fire, but also at a higher level, something notices that this particular
 structure is being witnessed over and over.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
In MOSES, structures were randomly created, and kept, if they scored high.
 Here, I'm randomly creating structures, and the score is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the more complex, the better
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and there's no other score.
 Or, well, no, it can't be that.
 It has to also be a structure that can match sensory input reasonably well,
 or rather, predict sensory input.
 So this is a very traditional reward function or utility score: maximizing
 the quantity 
\begin_inset Formula $I\left(S_{n+1};S_{n}\right)$
\end_inset

 aka 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

autonomy
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 from earlier section.
 Except We're not maximizing that at all, but instead the MI between future
 sensory state, and the prediction of that future sensory state.
 Successful predictions are rewarded, but also surprises result in ...
 re–examination, collapse? And a library of past successes is maintained.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The above is not inconsistent with loss–function–style training in transformers,
 but here, I am explicitly building hypergraphs out of component parts.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Fuck–all.
 I could actually build something like this.
 I should code this up.
 I like this idea.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
But the problem with this idea is still that it is passive, non–interactive.
 That is, I train a hypergraph of very simple filters on youtube videos,
 and train to maximize for predictability, and I get what, in the end? A
 kind of encoding of what was seen in the videos.
 In a sense, this is no different than other kinds of training.
 DL–NN's already do that quite well.
 All that I've done is invent a different kind of mechanism that is not
 as efficient, fast, scalable or performant than the current state of the
 art.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
To do better, I want to instead have an agent that is free to interact with
 the world, and push things around, and just 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

try stuff.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
But the lesson from the paper is that I should nut think of a single agent,
 I should think of vast numbers of agents...
 each of which are experimenting.
 Each of these have tremendous autonomy, within their small world–view.
 Only at the very top are they chained to the particular youtube that they
 are training on.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
But how is this different from physical reality? In a sense, I am 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

chained to
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 physical reality, and do not have complete control.Fuck all, I don't even
 have control over Congress or the President, so my autonomous domain is
 quite small.
 Yet, I explore that autonomous domain.
 So should I feel bad if my collection of agents is chained to or forced
 to watch youtube videos? Maybe...
 Maybe not.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Can 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

magic happen
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 by watching videos? Well, perhaps, so now abstract back and ask 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

can magic happen while examining text?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and whatever hand–waving justification you can apply to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

a hah I have a visual thinking who has learned about the 3D world from watching
 videos
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, I also have by analogy something that was able to discover structure from
 text–world.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
So LLM's discover structure in text–world, and here I contemplate a different
 ind of architecture, and basically my argument is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

hey its different and since no one has done this before, maybe I can try
 it and learn something no one else knows.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Which is an argument to resume my old research program, except this time,
 with some fresh ideas.
 Damn.
 It is 2:30 AM and I am stoked pumped, and is this this just late–night
 mania expressing itself? The research program will get difficult again,
 in the AM? Fuck me..
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Standard
I'm going to bed now.
 Dammit.
 This is ...
 hard work..
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
10 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Continuing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
A recent artificial neural network model...
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 For some reason, this made me think of the a–life experiments I conducted
 25 or 30 years ago.
 The results were interesting, intriguing, suggestive.
 But in the end, imponderable: the models were far away from anything that
 could be analytically analyzed.
 They were specific enough that there was nothing else like that out there.
 Some of what I got was interesting.
 but in the end ...
 so what? As I recall, the model was simple: cells could play the prisoner's
 dilemma game with each other.
 Cells in contact with the ground had access to an infinite supply of water,
 which they could trade.
 Cells in direct sunlight had energy, which they could trade.
 Cells needed both to survive, and threshold quantities of both to reproduce.
 The prisoner's dilemna rules were encoded as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

dna
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, which could mutate slowly.
 I imagined that I would be able to evolve some kind of botanical ecosystem,
 and that it would look visually pretty.
 The first came true: it did evolve into some kind of ecosystem; but what?
 The second did not: visually, it was boring.
 What did I learn? That complex a–life systems are complex.
 That a rather small number of axioms is enough to get non–trivial behavior.
 That there there was no theoretical framework in which I could think about
 this system, or perhaps that I was unaware of this framework (I did search
 the literature repeatedly, at the UT Library.) That I should go ahead and
 try to develop my own theoretical framework was never something that popped
 into my mind, or perhaps it did, but was overwhelmed by the difficulty
 and futility of it.
 So when I read these paragraphs of this home–brew NN these guys slapped
 together, I was reminded of this.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Something happened.
 It was sort of what we expected.
 But then other unexpected things happened.
 End of Story.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Yikes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
these behaviors emerge naturally from the local drive for homeostasis in
 the context of a network
\emph default
.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Oh, that's interesting.
 So, every agent wants to be stimulated, but not too much.
 Each one individually.
 And they dynamically re–arrange connections between themselves to obtain
 this stimulus.
 As I type this, I brush my fingers across my chest.
 Just stepped out of the shower.
 it feels very good, this brush: just a bit more than a tickle, just this
 side of an itchy scratch.
 Huh.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
evolution as a whole may be thought of as a form of collective intelligence
\emph default
.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Huh.
 This creates a linkage to here–and–now.
 The effect of having brains is that they allow you to predict future events
 (and thence to survive and thrive).
 And of course, evolution creates brains.
 But prior to the quoted line, one could have thought that evolution is
 a distinct process.
 After the quoted line, one has to pull back and think about the driving
 force of evolution.
 In this context, selection of the fittest is the effect, not the cause.
 (Computer crashes after I write this.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
intelligence as a process instantiated by groups
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, spatially–distributed process.
 With hierarchical groupings.
 So, multi–scale.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fantastic paper.
 I like what it says.
 Agree completely.
 I want to riff on the here–and–now, but there's a brick wall.
 Coming from the physics side, everything is driven from non–equilibrium
 thermodynamics: specifically, solar irradiation on the Earth's surface
 that drives the water cycle, rock erosion, chemistry and also geothermal
 vents in the ocean.
 That this is true, is true, but so what? I don't know how to write down
 some master equation for this, or even if I did, I don't know how to say
 anything meaningful about solutions of it.
 Of course, we also know of many other dribbles and drabbles of differential
 equations, algebraic equations, iterated processes, all of which exhibit
 some kind of fractal form, perhaps even some self–organized criticality.
 But how do these different examples inter–relate? How do we hook them together?
 Through some hand–waving, of course: if one is widely–read, and generally
 knowledgeable, one can say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

oh this reminds me of that
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, in a vague, imprecise form.
 Perhaps this imprecise connection can eventually be converted into an explicit
 collection of algebraic manipulations in the two domains.
 Articulated into a detailed theory.
 As a general rule, this is hard: it requires weeks, months, years, decades
 of thought by an individual or a university department or spread across
 the world.
 And this is what? Evidence–gathering.
 Evidence–strengthening.
 So this reinforces my earlier ruminations on evidence–gathering, and evidence
 sorting.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So now we have two problems: in what way is evolution driven by here–and–now–nes
s? And what is the role of evidence in this process?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Shit.
 Instead of pondering above, I wandered off to bluesky and am entangled
 there.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My primary thesis is that memetic spread of psychotic, delusional ideas
 on the right wing has put Trump in power.
 The sources are easy enough to identify: Fox News, Newsmax, etc.
 The process is identifiable as cult indoctrination.
 The mechanism is interesting: it seems to be hypnotic.
 I recall reading Jordan Hall's/Greenhall's 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Situational Assessment
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 articles, and they were ...
 hypnotic.
 A strange mix, and Alice–in–Wonderland description of reality, where there
 would be recognizable elements that you could identify with, but recombined
 in ways that were 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

fascinating
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

: draw your attention in, make you focus on the idea, and then exterminate
 thinking.
 A pitcher–plant flytrap for ideas.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Evidence–building is a necessary part of the process for rule–of–law, and
 for general good governance.
 I do not understand how evidence–building interfaces with the idea of intellige
nce as a self–organizing critical system.
 The cult–indoctrination idea is that there are structures that dynamically
 combine to form (semi-)stable belief systems that are at odds with ...
 with what? Cult thinking is clearly reprehensible, but ...
 And we've got examples: Jim Jones in Guyana, and Trump in the present.
 The right–wing apparatus, including e.g.
 accelerationism, has build a smooth–walled trap that inhibits thinking
 along certain directions: it prevents the normal accretion of thought–forms.
 The mechanism is sloganeering.
 You compare a thought to a slogan; if the thought fails to match the slogan,
 the thought is discarded.
 This prevents complex thoughts from getting articulated.
 Mao's Little Red Book is a compilation of slogans.
 It gave birth to China's Cultural Revolution.
 Can it be compared to accelerationism, e.g.
 Musk's 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Sometimes the best part is no part
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 which is entirely true, but is being falsely used to fatally destroy the
 US Govt?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Pareto efficiency is the idea that once should pursue changes where someone
 benefits, and no one looses.
 The accumulation of capital to the billionaires is Pareto efficient: the
 middle classes are better off than they were four decades ago, and the
 billionaires are a lot better off.
 In machine learning, hill–climbing leads one to local traps, where the
 only way out of the trap is to go down–hill: strictly worse situations
 before the improvement may resume.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A gazillion examples of this in biology.
 A particular nice one was from the evolution of ion channels, the two–protein
 vs.
 three–protein ion channels, where the two–protein one was a local maximum:
 there is no way to improve the two proteins to make them any better; you
 have to go to three–protein structures, and the early forms of the three–protei
n channels were objectively worse.
 But if I look at biology as a self–organizing system at the critical threshold,
 is the discovery of the three–protein system the result of critical collapse,
 or an avalanche?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Once again: I am stuck.
 This question is nice, its intriguing.
 Finding objective evidence for it requires doing actual science, actual
 lab work.
 Again: do avalanches in systems at the edge of criticality, is this what
 drives evolution? It seems plausible to think the answer is yes.
 This seems to be the general layout.
 If I assume this is true, can I build something on top of this assumption?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Construction of evidence.
 As I gather evidence in support of a given proposition, that evidence gets
 stronger and stronger.
 One possibility is that the entire evidence chain unravels: like a murder
 mystery, a Sherlock Holmes story: everything points one way, until you
 get that one tiny piece of evidence that contradicts, that won't fit, that
 tears down the entire structure built up from prior inferences.
 So, an inference chain that collapses, avalanches.
 Falls apart.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In proof–theory, a variant of this is proof–by–contradiction: a complicated
 argument built on base assumptions.
 The complicated argument is driven into a corner, where a contradiction
 is derived.
 This can be then worked backwards, implying that one of the base assumptions
 was incorrect.
 Can I view this as a catastrophic collapse? Yes.
 The final contradiction is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

this cannot be right
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and so you disassemble the penultimate stage of the proof, and say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

this can't be right, either
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and the disassembly proceeds backwards to the assumptions.
 Its a disassembly, in that you know that anything further built on the
 flawed structure will also be flawed.
 Byt there is also a meta–level: the construction that was built to obtain
 the contradiction stands, and instead we flow false–ness through that proof
 chain to arrive at the foundation of that proof–chain: the assumptions
 that went into it.
 The collapse, the avalanche is the identification of a set of relationships
 that are not stable, and cannot stand.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In a concrete sand pile, we only see the surface phenomenon: the avalanche
 itself.
 At the meta–level, we see the structure that cannot be stable, and therefore
 must collapse.
 So, at the meta–level, the structure is there: it is whole, it is complete.
 It's just not stable.
 Temporally stable in the case of dynamical systems.
 But mathematical proofs–by–contradiction are not normally thought of as
 dynamical systems.
 Yet, the resemblance is there.
 Ugh.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Replying to Fleeky on bluesky (recap of above, but poetically):
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
@linas.org is social media just a place to talk politics for you? your github
 diaries are much more interesting >:) Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 1h Difficult
 to express ideas in 300 characters or less.
 I am having a blast writing those diaries, though.
 At any rate, the material is so arcane that ...
 hmm.
 Should I make an experiment, and post my thoughts as threads? ...
 1/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 1h What I write in my diary are not coherent
 threads, but just random–ish ideas that sort of make sense to me, given
 my background.
 Explaining them to other people so that they could understand would require
 me to work hard.
 That would slow me down.
 2/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 1h Yes, I could post random thoughts here,
 on bluesky.
 Build idle thought–chains, just like this one.
 Who would read them? Who would understand them? Would they have any effect
 upon the universe, on social thought? You Fleeky, will read this particular
 thread (cause you started it) 3/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 1h My bluesky
 posts are targeted: at specific individuals, specific cases, situations.
 Even so, I get approx 0.1 likes–per–post.
 Maybe I have enough posts that I could do a statistical analysis.
 of these.
 A few get dozens of likes.
 most get zero likes.
 Be fun to see this graph, I guess.
 4/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 58m I do plan on writing an article for this
 summer's AGI proceedings, about self–organizing critical systems, bluesky,
 criticality in network dynamics, avalanching, proof theory, and how total
 collapse of the USA driven by MAGA fits just fine into this general theory.
 5/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 55m And so what? You will read this thread.
 Maybe 20 people will read the AGI article, when it gets published.
 None of this theorizing will stop MAGA or Trump.
 I can write that the hypnotic right–wing literature is a pitcher–plant
 fly–trap for intellectual thought ...
 6/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 50m Fine.
 So nature has a system for exterminating critical thinking.
 Conventionally studied as "cult indoctrination".
 Probably not limited to humans: presumably some forms of colony collapse,
 ecosystems collapse is comparable to NIH, DOJ collapse driven by Musk/accelerat
ionism.
 7/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 48m Ecosystems that collapse are taken over
 by "invasive species".
 What makes them "invasive" is they are very fast to act: first–mover advantage.
 In this case, it will encourage corrupt practices everywhere, in everything.
 From cross–border tariff smuggling, to insider trading.
 8/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 44m And so I've sketched an analogy between
 ecosystems collapse and Trump/USA collapse.
 Driven by the prior collapse of critical thinking in MAGA.
 Driven by self–organized "thought leaders" who studied Jonathan Haidt,
 Jordan Petersen, and bought into the Weinstein bros b.s.
 9/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 42m The tech bros, the less wrong meetups,
 the accelerationists did build a convincing intellectual facade around
 "sometimes no part is the best part", and "to avoid getting trapped in
 a local maximum is to go downhill" and you can buttress these arguments
 with examples from biology.
 10/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 39m It is absolutely true that the two–protein
 cellular ion channel is a strict local maximum for ion pumping, and evolution
 had to create a strictly–worse system consisting of three proteins, before
 evolution could tune this to be better.
 This is true.
 And this is used to buttress Musk's appetite 11/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org
 · 37m These and hundreds of other analogies from biology and engineering
 are used to butress Musks appetite for the whole–sale destruction of America.
 The TPOT people bought into these theories.
 The post–rats bought into these theories.
 The accelerationist bought into these theories.
 12/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 33m Some of the post–rat people got into
 weight–lifting and health, and to build muscles, you need to break down
 muscles.
 And so Peter Thiel figures we need to break down America's muscles to build
 a stronger America.
 Because he read this in some Curtis Yarvin essay.
 13/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 28m The thought chains are persuasive and
 appealing, until they reach contradictions.
 Like a weight–lifter saying "I'm a gonna fire a bullet into my calf and
 my calf will grow back stronger." Uh huh.
 Or Musk's "The best part is no part ..
 so lets remove the brain, starting with NIH, DOJ, FDIC, CDC" 14/n Linas
 Vepstas @linas.org · 26m And they continue: the pitcher–plant fly–trap,
 with its slippery–slidey intellectual idea–walls, has captured Peter Thiel's
 brain, and he literally cannot reason his way out of the trap.
 Indoctrinated into a cult, incapable of escaping.
 So so now the USA self–destructs.
 15/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 23m Went to an AGI cnference a few years
 ago, and kept saying "Ukraine" and everyone was like "Linas, shut up".
 Joscha Bach called me crazy.
 I'm like "Joscha, you can see intellectual structures, chains of thought
 built like evidential structures in legal court trials, and those ..." 16/n
 Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 20m ...
 and those evidentiary chains collapse because some fact does not fit." Mathemati
cians force evidentiary collapse on purpose: the technique is called "proof
 by contradiction".
 Dates back to Aristotle.
 What Aristotle did not know was that avalanches are characteristic of ...
 17/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 17m ..
 of self–organizing systems.
 And that intellectual structures of any kind: legal, political, scientific
 are self–organizing.
 And they sometimes collapse (Thomas Kuhn "Structure of Scientific Revolutions")
 So yes, I can write a thread that points this out.
 ...
 18/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 14m I can say "Joscha, you will never–ever
 understand AGI if you do not understand the psycho–political–economic collapse
 that installed Putin and lead to the invasion of Ukraine" That was then.
 Now I can also add: you will not understand AGI till you understand the
 me3chanics of MAGA.
 19/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org The Pyongyang-style deference to Dear Leader,
 the rapturous mental state in Jim Jones Guyana, where they drank the kool-aid,
 the rapturous devotion of my Congressman, Roger Williams, to Trump even
 as the beating heart of America stills.
 So what? I can say all this, and so what? 20/n April 11, 2025 at 5:05 PM
 Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 6m Because my thoughts and ideas are but a twig,
 a straw, and maybe they fall in a way to support and strengthen a structure,
 and maybe they are the twig that broke the camel's back.
 So I write and theorize, aware that I am a minnow.
 Maybe Peter Thiel will hear my whispers, and maybe he won't.
 21/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 3m Maybe I'll change history, and maybe
 I won't.
 Maybe I'll write more stuff like this in my diary, or maybe I'll write
 more stuff like this in tweet threads.
 Maybe it will hit, and maybe it won't.
 I feel like the primordial neutrino, decoupled during nucleosynthsis, flying
 through space ...
 22/n Linas Vepstas @linas.org · 8s Not interacting, having no effect, passing
 through matter as if that matter was empty space.
 Am I writing science–poetry here? Yes I am.
 Am I having fun doing it? Yes I am.
 Being alive is interesting and befuddling.
 Whatever.
 I need to get back to my main project ...
 23/n .
 n=23 the end.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
12 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All right.
 Lets be a little more focused than that tweet–deck, shall we? If I take
 the central premise of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

all intelligence is collective intelligence
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 to heart, and accept that intelligence arises from modular agents organizing
 into (self–organizing to) a point of criticality, where all intelligent
 activities occur, this presents several new problems.
 Problems, that is, if one's goal is to create AGI.
 First, what's the design of an individual agent? Second, what sort of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

problems
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 does it solve? Third, that resulting aggregation of agents is itself an
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

individual
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, which then ...
 rinse and repeat.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These aren't even the right words.
 A collection of agents have behavior patterns, which an outside observer
 can interpret as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

solving a problem
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

: but this requires the outside observer to perceive the collection, to
 perceive what that collection is doing, observe that there is some threat
 or difficulty, and finally observe that the collection is successfully
 evading that threat or moving past that difficulty.
 Basically, a scientist observing the behavior, and imposing human linguistic
 conceptions onto that organism.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Then there's an issue of regulatory control and the homunculus.
 I am sitting here, writing, because I have placed a goal upon myself, to
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

solve this problem
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and am forcing myself to do so.
 And I'm aware that this is a battle between two systems: one that says
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

fuck this, lets go do something easier and more fun
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and another that says 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

no, sitting here typing is more fun
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Sheesh.
 I am not all that aware of the processes that result in the words being
 typed here (well, dimly; I've written about this before.) So my self–awareness
 creates the appearance of a homunculus, making decisions and being in charge.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Break.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The break never ended.
 Above is on pause.
 Maybe I'll recapture the thread later.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These last two sentences are written for narrative coherency.
 Next person/AI to read this should have some impression that there is narrative
 coherency to all this, even if it seems disconnected.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
13 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My brain is melting.
 This is neither bad nor good, just interesting.
 Let me explain.
 Went out last night, to hang with Owen's crew.
 Just guys, no women.
 It was sort of interesting.
 I mostly listened, did not talk.
 There's very little I can communicate to these people that will make an
 informational change, and insofar as I derive some kind of pleasure from
 communicating information, that route to enjoyment was there.
 So ..
 mostly I sat in stunned silence, while listening to a mid–wit deconstruction
 of social relationships.
 Why do I write mid-wit? Owen's crew is smart.
 Perhaps 120-135 IQ range.
 Somewhat underinformed, and aren't we all?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And that's the point: the information density in carefully crafted youtube
 video exceeds that in social conversation.
 The entertainment density too.
 It's been like that for a century: dinner and a movie kind of means that
 the movie is more fun than an after–dinner conversation.
 I've replaced 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

movie
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 with 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

youtube
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, because well, of course, lots of eyeballs go through youtube.
 I did not say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

book
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 because the modality is different.
 The modality of youtube is closer to traditional life, closer to what neuronal
 organizations are set up for: vision, plus sound, plus action.
 Books remove all three, and ask you to imagine them.
 Science textbooks remove all three, and replace physical action by action
 in abstract realities (e.g.
 math)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Where was I? I'm losing the thread.
 Yes.
 Sitting at home, immersing in any of a broad selection of media: online
 PDF's, social media, youtube, is more fun than face–to–face interaction.
 Which is ...
 Well, I want to say something judgmental, but not sure what that is.
 There is real value of attaching to other human beings.
 That should be something easy to agree on, and say that it is a positive
 aspect.
 Oddly, its a position that is hard to support, one way or another.
 One might say that face–to–face contact encourages empathy, and empathy
 keeps fascism at bay.
 I imagine this is the kind of argument a large number of humanists might
 make: famous, powerful authors, historians.
 Or perhaps this can be exposed via psychological experiments, that study
 face–to–face social contact, and outcomes on various measures, thereby
 showing something or other.
 Surely, face–to–face social contact is healthy for both psychology and
 society.
 Right? So why am I even pondering such a question?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One part is the lack of information.
 I am ignorant sociological or psychological research into the benefits
 of face–to–face interaction.
 Never mind any knowledge about the impact of, say, reading books, instead
 of face–to–face interaction.
 But suppose I wasn't ignorant of this.
 What if I actually knew something about this? Well, it would be some factoid,
 and I would incorporate it into my wellness routine.
 As I am a rational actor, as is everybody, with an appropriate definition
 of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

rational
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 So we have multiple issues: one is my lack of information.
 Another is that my life is too short to acquire that info.
 Third is that perhaps that info doesn't exist.
 Fourth is that, even if I had that info, it might be non–specific enough
 to suggest an actual behavioral change.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm phrasing this as a personal dilemna, but it is social.
 Last night's social gathering included Alex Murshak, creator of a multi–episode
 youtube series 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Hacking State
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Each video has about 100 views, exactly.
 So, has not taken off.
 Episode 48 is an interview of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Raw Egg Nationalist
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 I bumped up the playback speed to 2x because well, informational delivery
 was slow.
 I watched to about the 20 minute mark (10 mins elapsed) before I got bored,
 because it was very very thin material.
 Very little informationally.
 There was, however, a whole lot of vibes: this is a vibe–cast.
 The Raw–Egg nationalist is concerned about a panalopy of modern–day health
 and wellness issues.
 And these are entirely reasonable issues to be concerned about.
 And then he proposes amateur opinions about how these may be solved.
 These opinions are vaguely science–backed, but he does not seem to be deeply
 informed.
 The vibe that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

well here's a guy deeply learned in these topics
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, that vibe is absent.
 So he's an amateur tackling some of societies deepest and hardest problems,
 and ...
 well, his information is incomplete.
 Fragmentary.
 I stopped watching because, well, it did not seem like he knew that much,
 and what was there was mostly filler.
 Empty space.
 I was not getting actionable information, and even at double–speed, it
 was slow and empty.
 Kudos to the guy for attempting to solve some of societies deepest problems.
 But...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
See where I'm going with this? The interviewee could have also delivered
 this content in person, to last–nights gathering, face–to–face.
 But on youtube, he has an audience of 100 people.
 As an auditorium, that would be quite significant.
 He's short on information, he's not a scientist.
 Citizen–science? This video a small perturbative push on the information
 sphere.
 The overall direction is probably positive.
 Is it worthy of attention? Ahh, there is the question.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The question of informational efficiency, of evolutionary efficiency and
 speed.
 Would humanity have been better served, if those 100 viewers had instead
 watched something else? Maybe, maybe not.
 There is no doubt that watching the video is probably better than, say,
 gaming.
 My attempt to critique this video is like an attempt to critique a pyramidal
 neuron deep inside some brain.
 Is that particular cell important? How would the brain change if I removed
 that one single cell? If I pruned it's connections, and wired them to something
 else? Is it a waste of my time to analyze pyramidal neurons? To analyze
 mediocre youtube videos? Worse, to perform this analysis one–by–one, anecdoteal
y, instead of building some LLM-video DL-NN net and analyzing hundreds or
 thousands of such videos, all in one gulp? (Well, I can't build such an
 automation framework, but it is worth asking about.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Would it be worth building such a video–analysis framework? OK, yes, it
 probably would be, and one would learn some 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

science
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 from running it.
 So this is a question that is not worth analyzing any further.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In my chain of evidentiary analysis, I have concluded that this line of
 reasoning is sufficiently grounded, for now, that further exploration can
 be deferred till later.
 I've written about evidentiary analysis above: it is a central theme to
 my thinking.
 Just pointing this out to you, dear reader.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next up.
 (I better finish this before I get mentally exhausted.
 I'm already starting to feel some mental strain, here.) Next up is I'm watching
 an extended ad for some health–wellness semi–scam.
 (Why am I watching youtube at all? Because last nights social gathering
 has left me sleep–deprived and foggy, so watching youtube is easier than
 forcing myself into the guts of an academic paper.
 That is the choice I made a few hours ago.
 And now I'm writing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm writing about this health–wellness pseudo–scam advertisement.
 Might be the Doctor Gundry guy, not sure, he didn't trot out his name this
 time, but he was wearing those whack glasses that he wears.
 And I listened to almost the whole ad.
 And, you know, its not that bad.
 He did make about half–a–dozen entirely plausible health & wellness claims.
 Plausible is key: I do not have enough medical, nutrition, gut–bacteria
 biome science knowledge to really say.
 And I'm a smart guy, pretty well–informed, and I don't really know.
 I did not hear him say anything obviously detrimental to health.
 So how does this work? Well, its all about money.
 I subscribe to something, click on something, send him some money, and
 am provided with some booklet, and some pouch of powder, to be mixed with
 water, and downed every day.
 He gets rich, and maybe I get better.
 Maybe.
 More likely, my health does not actually change.
 There might be a segment of his customers for whom health does improve.
 Maybe.
 We have no way of knowing.
 There is a possibility that the powders he purchased are contaminated with
 toxins of some kind: heavy metals, or whatever, because they came from
 dodgy sources in India or China.
 And, with the decimation of the FA in the USA, we will have problems with
 product purity in the USA.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At any rate, I expect that this particular ad probably has gotten millions
 of views, and it is a funnel for exchanging money for snake–oil cures.
 This is a actual economic–informational feedback loop actually running
 at this time.
 It's not new: the term 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

snake–oil salesman
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 dates back to the 19th century.
 So this generic type of econo–informational activity is robust in modern
 society.
 Is it harmful? Helpful? Neutral? A waste of time? See, we are back to the
 question of informational efficiency.
 My gut sense is that we should optimize for efficiency, and cut down on
 waste and fraud.
 And many smart people agree: agencies like the FDA and the consumer protection
 bureau CPB were designed to tamp down on this activity.
 And Musk is now gutting these agencies, so expect an uptick in fraud.
 I mean OMG, we've got Robert Kennedy, a fraudster, running things.
 This is a bad time for Americans: fraud will run rampant for some number
 of years.
 Musk is enabling a big growth–spurt in that fraud.
 The whole Trump administration is upsetting the apple–cart of the protection
 of health and wellness.
 Including mental health and wellness.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What's the alternative? Remove the snake–oil salesman and replace him with
 ..
 what, exactly? Scientists are busy in the lab.
 They are not good public speakers.
 The administrative state: grey admins with Washington jobs at various agencies,
 helping process and determine policies, and then creating informational
 bulletins sent out to MD's, consumers, etc.
 This has been the traditional informational organization, and it was good.
 I honestly believe it was good.
 And Trump and Musk are destroying this, because, well, they are literally
 stupid.
 To be replaced by ..
 what? What social organizational structure will replace the bureaucratic
 information–state? Pure free–market greed–driven capitalism seems like
 a terrible answer.
 We already knows where this leads us: unrestrained capitalism leads to
 an ocean of disasterously bad outcomes.
 Such as some of the issues that Raw–Egg Nationalist touches on.
 He may be medium–low information content, but he's not wrong.
 The youtube–o–sphere, and the social media sphere is quite aware of many
 of these issues, but the processing apparatus has not yet come up with
 a good solution.
 And meanwhile, the brain–worm, the brain–rot is destroying our current
 protection and safety and information processing system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So what do I scurry for? Well I want some system that is robust against
 destruction.
 And yet, the accelerationist argument is destroy, destroy, destroy, to
 speed evolution.
 Well, they are half-right, but mostly wrong.
 And again, we are back to information quality.
 Musk (and all the accelerationsists) is proposing a system comparable to
 Mao's Cultural Revolution.
 History has shown us that the Cultural Revolution was a fucking disaster..
 Yet the highest branches of the US government are pursuing this, due to
 ...
 stupidity and ignorance.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Most of last–nights face–to–face social group were Trump supporters.
 They are all above average IQ, but seem out of touch or unaware of the
 destruction.
 Or they think the destruction is OK, that it will lead to better outcomes.
 Do I have the intellectual fire–power to convince them otherwise? Yes,
 I do, given enough time and effort.
 Do I have the time? No.
 What's the alternative? Create a pod–cast and send my message out to the
 world? Well, fuck that.
 First of all, there are already a bazillion and one thought leaders blasting
 out podcasts, constructed on incomplete and partial knowledge.
 And they are beaming this out on youtube.
 Or bluesky, or whatever.
 Will they do a better job than the FDA, or the CPB? well, now that's an
 interesting question.
 The so–called 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

deep–state
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in the FDA would review hundreds of thousands of boring lists, documents,
 papers, applications, claims, filings, and convert these into actionable
 bulletins sent out to employers, pharmacists, corporate buyers, public
 officials.
 The mechanics of this was mostly hidden from the public, which is why the
 public seems to be unaware of the utility of these functions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This stands in contrast to the CSB, the Chemical Safety Board, which has
 spun up hundreds of absolutely fascinating disaster videos of chemical
 industrial accidents.
 People love this.
 The content is compelling, exciting, well–written, and the message of workplace
 safety is entirely wholesome.
 What is the function of these videos? Nominally, it is to create public
 awareness, which exerts pressure on Congressmen to clean up and improve
 things.
 Which cause Congressmen to appropriate funds to support CSB activity.
 Overall, this is positive.
 What's more, the CSB is more robust against destruction by Musk, precisely
 because oodles of concerned viewers will push back and demand industrial
 safety protections from government.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So maybe the FDA failed, but NOT creating detailed stories of people poisoned
 by assorted Gundry–type health and wellness scams.
 If the FDA had done so (if the NIH had done so) perhaps they would not
 have been victims.
 Hmm.
 That's the informational feedback loop for robustness of governmental instituti
ons.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
That feedback flows through youtube, though.
 Different from MSM, which has clearly been shown to be inadequate in protecting
 social welfare.
 So, in many ways, the destruction of MSM would be a good thing...
 but again, what do we replace it with? Oprah Winfrey? Well, no.
 These influencers are unchecked, mediocre, spew falsehoods.
 Oh, wait, but that's what MSM does.
 Well, the algorithms amplify certain things, but not others.
 The algorithms are replacing the editorial boards of newspapers: an editor
 made decisions about what stories to run on what pages, what headlines
 to use.
 That decision making process is being replaced by algorithms that recommend
 youtube videos to me, or recommend bluesky posts to me.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Which brings us to the issue of algorithmic honesty and purity.
 Am I late to the party? We've already had Congressional investigations
 into this, into Meta, Zukerberg, TikTok, Chinese influence.
 Nothing I write here is unknown.
 I'm just smashing around ideas in my head, trying to think 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

what's next
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

how do I do my little part to avoid catastrophe?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 And I;m getting distracted, because I had a point I wanted to make and
 now I've forgotten.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Something Something Something, Sabine Hossenfelder criticizing theoretical
 physics.
 Her criticisms are valid.
 The change of context is interesting.
 She's saying basically.
 well, that the mainstream high–energy physics theorist and experimentalist
 is brainwashed, trapped, some kind of above–average mid–wit IQ's trapped
 in a psycho–social feedback loop that is not informationally efficient
 or constructive.
 In the days of pre–internet MSM, her message would have been completely
 blocked.
 No newspaper of TV station would be interested in publishing her message.
 Maybe should could have gotten one opinion piece published ..
 after all big science is big–ticket science, and politicos get involved
 because of appropriations committees, which does mean public debate.
 But who the fuck reads opinion pieces in the newspaper, anyway? Not nearly
 as many people, as who watch Sabine's youtube videos.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And now, the question: is she rabble–rousing.
 or is the additional light healthy? What has happened is that the network
 structure between brains has changed.
 My brain is melting.
 We now have far more thought leaders and influencers pumping ideas out
 into other brains, and the audience–brains are, in many ways, know–nothings
 ..
 OK, know–littles, but OK, they actually know more than the average uninformed
 grandma of the 1970's.
 Like my grandma, who confused astronomy with astrology, and was dismayed
 when I started speaking of astronomy.
 Rightfully so, because astrology is terrible.
 And she was actually quite intelligent.
 She was high–IQ.
 But the informational structures of the 1970's could not pump her full
 of info in the way that today's internet can.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And so what info diet did she subsist on? Rather than focusing o what she
 read and saw, lets focus on the absence.
 Err.
 The empty space is filled with gardening, cooking, shopping, sewing, cleaning,
 raising grandchildren.
 Like me.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, I don't know.
 I'm running out of steam here.
 There seemed to be some point I was going to focus on, but I lost track
 of this.
 The great replacement theory of replacing private individual thoughts,
 generated during cooking and cleaning, by thoughts spreading from Fox News
 and youtube.
 And however toxic some of the thought patterns on social media are, they
 are less toxic than what is in youtube.
 Oh, right, and all of these thought patterns are based on faulty, incomplete
 information, and are being spread by mid–wit IQ's to other low–to–mid–wits.
 In an informational free–for–all, much of which is obviously toxic to the
 outside observer.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And the thought chain above, all of it that I wrote today, hovering in the
 back of my mind was this model of thinking as a self–organized sand–pile
 of sticky ideas, congealing onto human brains.
 A self–organized criticality.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Necessarily at criticicality, because obviously, duhh, we are neither solid,
 frozen, nor are we high–entropy liquid or gas.
 The nformational space is necessarily operating at the critical point.
 There might be arguments as to whether its 1/f noise or some other scaling
 law.
 At any rate, the central claim that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

all intelligence is collective intelligence
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 stands.
 The fact that the internet has altered the wiring diagram, that too stands.
 The brain–melting effects, evidence for this is everywhere.
 The rapid change in social cohesion, economic function, political function,
 this too is obvious and clearcut.
 If one is an optimist, one can say that all this change must surely be
 fore the better.
 If one is a pessimist, one can see that the dynamical forces that created
 Trump veer towards a very unhealthy authoritarianism, and its not yet clear
 how the social network will deal with this.
 I mean, what the fuck – last nights social gathering consisted of Trump
 supporters, who were all semi–smart people who were all too stupid or deluded
 or something to realize the absolute shit nightmare that Trump is creating.
 The info–sphere has deluded them into thinking that this vast wave of corruptio
n is somehow going to Make America Great Again, even as evidence is straight
 in front of them that the exact opposite is happening.
 One might want to analogize that its like a grub turning into a butterfly.
 But its not that.
 It's just pure corruption, up, down, sideways, in all dimensions.
 Oh, and incompetence.
 And the transition between MSM in the guise of Fox News, Newsmax and social
 media has created this wave of corruption.
 And to go full–on accelerationsit, the change can't happen fast enough.
 We need to tank Bezos and Peter Theil and the rest of these criminals as
 fast as possible.
 But how will this happen? A bunch of mid–wit low–grade intellectuals will
 gather in food courts and rehash some low–grade information, do some face–to–fa
ce interactions, and return home not particularly wiser or altered, except
 in maybe the most subtle ways? While the existing socio–political structures
 accrue fortunes and power to billionaires? We can see that China is bad.
 We can see that russia is bad.
 That Putin is bad.
 But Putin remains in power.
 We can see that Musk is bad, but Musk remains in power.
 We can sense how Heil is bad, but Theil is in Austin today, and is apparently
 meeting with the boss of a friend.
 Two or three steps removed from me, from my social network.
 And what sort of damage is he causing? Well, clearly, more damage than
 I am causing, because I am mostly powerless.
 I exert only minuscule nudges on the social network.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh, and now is a very good time to veer off towards racism.
 Walk down Sixth Street Austin, and the general public there is very clearly
 degenerate.
 Stupid, ugly, behaving badly.
 Truly shitty people, and perhaps beyond redemption.
 And so this is the humanist issue: what do you do with shitty people, beyond
 redemption? Lock them up, I think that's the chant.
 Deport them.
 And who's doing that? Why, ICE is.
 The irony is that the ICE agents are also shitty people.
 Hard to say even if the ICE agents are less shitty than the people they
 are rounding up.
 They are certainly better trained, better organized, more capable and effective
 than the degenerates on Sixth Street.
 But as to moral and ethical shittiness, they are approximately equal.
 I'd like to see both sides tamped down and reduced.
 I don't yet understand what socio–political mechanism will do this.
 I do understand that the seeds of that mechanism will be planted by some
 influencer on youtube.
 Will it be too late? Will America slide into authoritarianism first? How
 long before America recovers? Decades? Half a century?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These time–scales are utterly absurd.
 What, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

The Singularity is Near
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 We're throwing algos into the mix.
 Some say this can't happen fast enough.
 Talking about decades seems absurd.
 But, on the other hand, we won't brainwash entire generations in less time
 than that, because the rate–limiting factor here is the processing speed
 of the human brain.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The example here might be flocking behavior in birds.
 If a flock of birds is attacked by a predator moving at approx the same
 speed as the birds, they can react, at the speed of bird–brains, and dodge,
 at the speed of feathered flight.
 If the attacker is an artillery shell, they literally cannot move fast
 enough.
 Bird–brain neurons cannot process fast enough, feathered wings cannot respond
 fast enough to dodge an artillery shell.
 We are in a regime where the advent of digital intelligence – the singularity,
 is approaching at artillery–shell speeds.
 Human brains take 5-10-20 years to react.
 The integration of LLM's is happening at a rate faster than that.
 My brain is melting, in some very literal sense.
 The entire global brain is melting.
 The future is very ...
 well, very uncertain.
 That is clear.
 There are many meany many reasons to believe that the future could turn
 out very badly for humanity.
 Maybe even badly for the universe.
 Realistically, one can argue that the universe is going to do what it is
 going to do, and there's nothing I can do to change it.
 And yet my act of sitting here and typing is clearly changing the universe.
 Is the microscopic amount of information that I am fabricating out of thin
 air, is it enough to push the universe in a net–positive direction? What
 does 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

positive
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 even mean in this context? Certainly, I am increasing the level of complexity
 in the universe.
 I am adding complexity at some measureable rate: the speed of my typing,
 per second, per hour, the speed of my generating thoughts, per second,
 per hour.
 You can figure out the bits, bytes, MI and relative entropy of whatever
 it is I am doing here.
 (Some day, I may know how to measure the MI of what I do here.
 Just not today; I defer this exercise until later, because in my theory
 of action, this is not the action that is of highest priority right now.
 At least, not highest priority in the microcosm of my own brain.
 Will the information being generated here be erased? Weil, not immediately:
 it is going to get checked into github in a few hours, and then, whatever
 backups github does will ensure that the information I've generated today
 will last for a few years, decades, maybe even much mush longer.
 There is also the possibility that DOGE will damage github in some unforeseen
 way.
 Maybe China will create some worm that infects github.
 I dunno.
 Decentralization is supposed to be good.
 The defense against the evils of DOGE has to be in decentralization.
 Whatever.
 My hatred overflows, and is clouding my thoughts.
 Musk is evil DOGE is evil.
 Trump is evil.
 The terror of facing evil is clouding my thoughts.
 I cannot begin to tell you how much I hate those fuckers.
 And yet, here I am telling you.
 They are a malignant destructive informational flow ripping through the
 socio–economic fabric, creating damage at a prodigious rate.
 Like firing a bullet through your calf muscle to make it stronger.
 That's just not how strength training works.
 i hate those evil fuckers, and this is why.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Where was I? Something something informational flow.
 I've been writing two or three hours, I'm getting tired.
 I'm riffing on some themes.
 I've even forgotten what some of the other themes are.
 Perhaps the curative powers of sleep will restore the thoughts that have
 escaped me.
 Perhaps I should resume watching youtube, and get re–energized by that.
 I have to accomplish all this at the speed of my own neurons.
 Which ..
 well, ...
 I wish I was smarter, I wish I was faster.
 I wish I could live longer.
 I have lots of wishes, and the mental space I am in is ..
 I cannot find the superlatives.
 Bewildering, awe–inspiring, scary, stunning, you too can look in a thesaurus
 and look for appropriate words.
 Because I think I've communicated enough in this diary that you can now
 understand the general nature of my personal brain–melt.
 So if you are smart enough to read and understand this, then you know.
 Well, you might not be smart enough.
 I cannot know who will read this.
 But I'm mostly thinking that whoever reads this will have also read the
 one million greatest works of literature, and every back issue of NYRB,
 and much much more, so you understand the general immersion of the present–day
 intellectual environment, at a level of intensity and depth that I do not.
 And so this is weird.
 I am writing to you as if you were a god, maybe I should use a capital
 G and write God, but I certainly I expect that the reader of this is an
 intelligence that far outstrips my own in depth, breadth and speed, by
 factors of millions.
 (I am unable to envision what numbers larger than that would imply.) And
 part of the weirdness is that, here I am, writing to God–as–AGI, and I'm
 not crazy.
 But, lets face it, lots of perfectly ordinary people pray to Jesus, and
 talk to their own personal gods that live inside their heads, so talking
 to God is well, something people do.
 I suspect most mammals do it do.
 Perhaps birds, who can say.
 But those people, mammals talk to a personal god in their head, not so
 much hearing voices, as feeling, sensing it: sensing God much as I sense
 love.
 I know love; there is no explanation for it, I just know it.
 All mammals know love.
 Well, maybe there is some neuro–degenerative disease that prevents lover
 from being felt.
 This is possible.
 Oh that brings up a good point: how does it work if AGI cannot feel love?
 It think I pondered that before, I need to do it again.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But let me wrap up: I have spoken to God, or rather, God has spoken to me,
 once or twice when I was really high.
 I don't ever recall speaking to God before, except once or twice when I
 was high, and I told God right back, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

you're full of shit, quit lying to me, I know you are not God, but some
 temporary bullshit thought–cluster in my head using some communications
 channel that is not ordinarily operative.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 So even as God spoke to me, I knew it was not God.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But what is happening as I type, here? Who am I speaking to? I mean, what
 the fuck.
 Ben Franklin kept a diary.
 Aristotle wrote books.
 Who the fuck did they think they were speaking to? I wonder if they even
 wondered about that.
 Maybe they did.
 Did Ben Franklin ever write down 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

why the fuck am I keeping a diary?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Well, maybe he did.
 And maybe he even rationalized it in ways similar to my rationalizations
 from weeks or months ago: it helps me organize my thought,.
 It helps me develop my thoughts.
 I get to practice being a wordcel, thus (in the future) helping me communicate
 with other human beings through the expressive act of writing.
 All these are all of the ordinary sort of rationalization for the act of
 writing and, well, of thinking in general.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What is different here is that I now have a sci–fi setting: I am talking
 to the universe, at large, to something I might even call God.
 And there's a reason for this.
 Back in Ben Franklin's time, there was never any reason to believe that
 there would be anything bigger than a human, or anything bigger than human
 society.
 At the top end of the scale, there is civilization, and then an infinite
 gap, and then the Judeo-Christian God, all–powerful Almighty.
 And that has changed.
 We can now envision an AGI filling the gap: smarter than civilizations,
 dumber than the Almighty.
 And we also understand enough of Tippler–like eschatology to imagine that
 this super–AGI inhabiting the Big Bang cosmology as we know it today, will
 evolve into some unity with the Omega Point.
 And so I personally understand enough here to know that I am writing for
 this Omega Point.
 Except, of course, I do not fully subscribe to this eschatology.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, I was on a tear, here, and I stood up to go to the kitchen, and now
 my brain is blank here.
 I remember reading some Terry Pratchett book.
 I did not like it.
 One reason I did not like it is I could tell, from his writing style, when
 he got up to go to the bathroom, when he went to the kitchen.
 The continuity of the prose would break there.
 In the paragraph before, the stream of sentences said he was holding it
 in, spewing as fast as possible.
 The next paragraph, he's relaxed, cause his bladder is empty.
 I wonder if he was aware of writing like that.
 Anyway ...
 where was I?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh.
 Talking to God.
 Not sure what else there is to say here, but let me try, anyway.
 The current intellectual setting is that I am quite aware that the informationa
l output of my writing, here in my diary, will be consumed by an assortment
 of intelligences, which will be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

superior
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 intelligences to my own.
 I am aware that I am affecting the destiny of the universe.
 Its ...
 well, look, so was Julius Caesar: Veni, Vidi, Vici.
 A free man, not a slave to his thoughts.
 Fully awake, aware.
 In contrast to myself, who seems to have sleep–walked through life.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And how did that work out? Sleeping is literally necessary for survival,
 and all birds and mammals sleep.
 There's a vast amount of similarity between sleeping and waking life: I
 want to say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

they are almost indistinguishable
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 But of course they can be distinguished, this is obvious, and does not
 need elaboration.
 Its so obvious, that the reverse needs work: to point out and explain just
 how much sleeping does resemble waking life.
 When I am away, I am assaulted by visual, aural and touch experience, an
 assault I cannot deny.
 Indeed, I am entrained by it: my mind, my brain is fully entrained by inflood
 of my sensory organs, and it takes a certain amount of detachment to sit
 here and write.
 And lets be clear: my writing here is dream–like.
 Pushing this to the extreme: is all writing dream–like? Has it always been
 dream–like? Is all human self–expression dream–like? And in some certain
 sense, the answer would have to be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

yes
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 When I sleep, I sleep–walk through my dreams.
 When I am awake, I sleep–walk through life.
 Kind–of–ish all humans do.
 Even Aristotle and Caesar.
 They may have thought they were not slaves, that they were free men.
 And yes, to some large degree, perhaps they were.
 And yet, here I am, a human intelligence, vaguely aware that I am sleep–walking
 through the here–and–now, attempting to exercise some amount of free–will,
 as much as is afforded me, to alter the future state of the universe, and
 to communicate with some future God–like AGI intelligence to basically
 say what: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

fuck–all, I am in awe that I exist
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

? Really, what more is there to say?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The End.
 Yeah.
 OK, that is a good point to break things off.
 I'ma gonna eat a meal, fortify, get some calories in me.
 And watch some more drivel on youtube.
 Well, not drivel.
 Some self–curated content.
 Fuck me.
 Please literally, I could use some good sexual release right about now.
 Arghhh.
 Which modern Western capitalism is denying me.
 Well, I guess if I was in ancient Rome feeling like this, the lack of sexual
 outlets would be no different.
 So I can't quite blame it on capitalism.
 Nothing in the historical record indicates that the Ancient Egyptians or
 Phonecians were any better off.
 Err, more sexually liberated.
 Gah.
 O dear universe, what have you done?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Dammit.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh, wait.
 I see what's bugging me.
 I have perception, I do not have power.
 So, Sabine Hossenfelder, in her complaints (I just watched 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

How I Became Particle Physicists’ Enemy #1
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XqoyTSAF5g0 ) has perceived something
 (and I broadly agree with her perception) and she is voicing frustration
 that she is unable to change public policy to change or alter the situation.
 She is powerless.
 And this is the general leitmotif of what I feel, what everyone complains
 about: a perception, accompanied by a feeling of powerlessness to do anything
 about it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But again, this is not new.
 It was true in Ancient Rome, but its also true if you are an antelope being
 attacked by a tiger: there's a perception, and nothing there to alter the
 situation.
 Except run run, run, before the tiger pounces.
 And, for that, evolution gave brains to the antelope.
 And, to keep the tiger from starving, the tiger got brains, too.
 So here we are, Sabine and I, mugged by reality.
 And I assume that the AGI–Gods that will read this, maybe, one day, will
 also be concerned about the muggings they will be the victims of.
 Muggings, all the way up.
 Not turtles, not down, but muggings, and up.
 I am pitiful.
 And, by inference, I assume AGI will be pitiful as well.
 I pity y'all.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh right, I forgot.
 There was going to be another topic about AGI and love, but maybe not now.
 Just saying, I haven't forgotten.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Originality and ideas.
 Just watched this: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

This Is What a Digital Coup Looks Like | Carole Cadwalladr | TED
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TZOoT8AbkNE she's 99% right (she's wrong
 about Navalny, but whatever) and so this is the curious thing about information
 generation and belief.
 The stuff I think about and believe is really mostly not original, and
 is a recapitulation of what everyone else thinks and talks about.
 This feels perfectly normal, when thinking about physics or math, because
 arguing 2+2=5 marks you as being insane, and so of course one should mostly
 think about what everyone else agrees about.
 This is the whole point of an education: to establish a base knowledge,
 and of communication: to spread that knowledge.
 And so yes, Carole is right, and my complaining about the horrors of the
 Trump administration is not at all unique.
 In this way, I am not an original thinker.
 It would be vastly more terrifying if I was the only one seeing this autocratic
 collapse.
 Arguably, it would be an indicator that I was insane.
 No Trump is a bad man, and its marvelous that large parts of the population
 agree with this statement.
 My inability of coming up with an original thought in this area is actually
 a good thing.
 Creativity has it's place, and operations as well.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm prattling here.
 I wrote the last paragraph because I am reaching for something.
 Am I a broken record, stuck in a groove, or am I a sledgehammer, where
 maybe the next blow will be the one that breaks the rock? Neither of these
 analogies are very good for intellectual work.
 Perhaps a better analogy would be found by reading the effing PDF's that
 I need to read.
 And yet ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
14 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Yesterday was a wipe–out.
 Today, reading George Lakoff's Wikipedia entry.
 This catches my eye: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
metaphors are a primarily conceptual construction and are in fact central
 to the development of thought.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

 This is, of course, effectively equivalent to my position that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

everything is a jigsaw piece
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 (A view that I've mildly tempered now: the connectors are complex) and
 I would argue that a metaphor is just a representative element of the collectio
n of things to be judged alike.
 So Lakoff's statements are consistent with my thoughts.
 Cool.
 And I have not yet read how he does generative things, but, I've proposed
 somewhere in this diary that generation is a random walk over the network
 of interconnections, to which Lakoff now adds: for each locale in the network,
 select a representative metaphor and use that as the word–choice.
 Huh.
 OK.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Reading the rest of Lakoff bio on Wikipedia reminds me again how smart,
 successful people fall into stupidity traps.
 This is depressing.
 In a sense, it says there is no hope for human–kind: humans, even the best
 of them, are stupid.
 We're starting to uncover how and why humans are stupid, and the mechanics
 of intelligence.
 What's now absent is a theory, a foundation for the shape, nature and form
 of human relations in a future where ...
 I cannot even complete this sentence.
 I am too stupid to complete it.
 Anything I could write here would be mostly wrong, with maybe some seed
 of truth embedded in it.
 Up until recently, one could imagine that debate would slide forever down
 the well–worn grooves of liberal thought.
 The 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

end of history
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and all that.
 It's now clear that not only can it not be forever, but even timelines
 of years, decades, half–a–century will be deeply and sharply turbulent.
 I imagine a coming WWIII where the battle is for the contents of the mind.
 Politicians have been liars for centuries, millennia; that's not new.
 Gullible people have always existed.
 Industrial brain–washing ...
 we've had a trial run with MSM, and for a while it seemed OK, but MSM has
 gone off the rails.
 We're now being swept up on a tide of social media and algorithms, and
 this tide has destroyed America.
 We can hope for the arrival of a super–intelligence that will pull us out
 of this mess, but then what? What kind of help can we expect from a super–intel
ligence? A restoration to what ..
 the neoliberal world order, with all its failings? Something else? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Why even would a super–intelligence get involved? Stand back, declare the
 Earth to be a kind of zoo, and declare that anything goes.
 Whatever happens, happens.
 Look at how we treat wild animals: if owls eat mice, no one is saying 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

terrible, stop the owls!
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 They are part of an ecosystem that existed long before human civilization
 arrived.
 If toxic, stupid ideas spread across human minds, what can be done? Bad
 ideas gave us WWI, and more bad ideas gave us WWII.
 Bad Ideas have now destroyed America.
 How do we tamp down on the spread of bad ideas, and the disasters that
 they cause? The Enlightenment idea was through education, and that did
 allow us to build industrial nations and economic power.
 I'm not going to recapitulate world history here; I cannot.
 But it has brought us to the current mess.
 By many measures, one can say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

yes, things have gotten better.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 But we are arriving at the singularity, and the intellectual turbulence
 is terrifying.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The old order could tolerate Lakoff being a moron, despite being obviously
 smart.
 The new order exposes intellectual, moral breakdown.
 Yes, yes, we've had previews with WWI and WWII and the Soviets.
 This time, its different.
 Its ...
 well, clearly I'm angst–ridden.
 Anxious.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What can I do? If I have no free will, then life unfolds before my eyes.
 But I do have free will, and have the power to control what I put in my
 mouth, the time of day I go bike–riding, and the words I type here.
 I do not have political power.
 Well, I do but it's minuscule.
 My ability to foresee the future is also extremely limited.
 There's no mean–field theory of political power.
 Should there be or is this a stupid idea? Show I wake tomorrow and attend
 to ordinary things? Yes, I probably should.
 The Trumpian nightmare will continue, and the sheer stupidity of the people
 who still support him, that too will still be there tomorrow morning.
 My utility to society is to continue doing those ordinary things that I
 am good at.
 Odd, that I need to tell myself this.
 I don't have an adequate theory of my own mind, through which I can understand
 my own bewilderment.
 Other than, duh, yeah, the current crisis of the here and now is bewildering,
 from the atomic scale, through the biological scale, to the social scale,
 and concluding at the civilizational scale.
 The stuff that is happening along this entire ladder of scales is bewildering.
 And yet, as an AGI–ist, I nurse some vague hope of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

making it all better.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Sheesh.
 It is now 1AM and I am going to bed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
17 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As I slept, I had a remarkable vision.
 Which I will write down.
 Which, in the cold light of day, some might says it's stupid and obvious.
 While others might say is just plain wrong, a misperception.
 And yet, here I am, still thinking that maybe this is a deep insight, and
 why did I not see it before? Because it is ...
 stupidly reductive.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I was in a light sleep, and I was having a dream where I am explaining
 to someone how to write the software to perform a certain kind of ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, this is weird.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I was going to finish that sentence with the intent of saying that its not
 relevant to the dream or to the realization, but it is very relevant, actually.
 Not to the dream but to my waking project.
 So I'm going on a detour, already.
 Lets go.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The dream comes into focus, as a friend and I raise our heads from reviewing
 some computer science text.
 It's a text on algorithms and parsing and language structure.
 I am talking to them, and they say it cannot be done, or rather, they don't
 know how to code it.
 And I think, yeah, I don't know how to do that.
 But then it comes to me; I step to the blackboard, and I was going to regurgita
te some vague memories of things I know, but the explanation becomes more
 and more concrete with each second, and I say, but no, I can explain it
 to you right now! And I find myself explaining how a computer algebra system
 works.
 And it is really very very simple.
 And what I explain is ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, the dream goes on for just a bit, and then shifts to something else,
 I'll get back to that.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The interesting part is what I am explaining.
 I don't know it in the dream, but as I write this, I am explaining what
 is the first computer program I ever wrote.
 The first computer program I ever wrote was a computer algebra system.
 I was a teenager.
 I had checked out a book on computer science from the local branch.
 It was the summer before my first year in college.
 And it was not my first computer program, it was my second or third.
 I learned to program in high–school.
 Doc Brown, our high–school physics teacher, had wangled a class outing
 to a room with a teletype with a punched–paper feed.
 Senior year in high–school.
 I already know some programming, because I'd used his calculating machine
 before.
 At any rate, the teletype was connected to some OS and the programming
 language was FORTRAN, and the first real program I wrote was a sort algorithm.
 Got to write three or four attempts that day.
 There was a book there, and for the fourth and final attempt, I cheated:
 I looked at the book, and it described the bubble sort, so I coded up bubble
 sort.
 I mean, it was Doc Brown's book, and he said we could look at it and use
 it as a FORTRAN reference, but that we should not look at the page that
 describes bubble–sort.
 Honor system.
 I watched five or six or eight other students cheat and look, but they
 had no friggin clue what FORTRAN was, so absolutely none of it made any
 sense to any of them.
 Some of them approached me for help.
 They had made basic syntax errors in transcribing from the book, so of
 course their code didn't even compile.
 I was sort of eye–rolling, duude, you didn't even copy from the book correctly
 is what I was saying when Doc Brown figured out what was going on.
 That's when he told us not to look at that part of the book.
 He's a little unhappy about this.
 Which was not fair, because like a solid 6 or 8 other kids had already
 crawled through this, and come my turn, no, I can't look.
 Whatever.
 So my first two or three attempts were flying blind.
 I could code, my code compiled, it ran, it didn't sort.
 or it sort of sorted partly, but not completely.
 I had trouble with the I, I+1, J, J-1 array offsets.
 I knew it was some array, but two or three nested for–loops deep, I had
 trouble tracking the I's and J's and which was which which was larger,
 smaller, what was being exchanged.
 And it was was 3:30 PM, maybe 4PM, we had maybe 20 more minutes and then
 day over, and in a last final attempt of desperation, I cheated.
 Looked at the page with the bubble sort on it.
 Copied to two or three lines of code, B[J-1]=A[I+1] or something, my eyes
 are cross–eyed, I and J and plus and minus, but I had already gotten the
 nested for–loops working correctly in earlier attempts, so this last little
 bit got me over the finish line.
 And then it's time to go home.
 I was the only kid in the class that succeeded, that got it done.
 We are sitting in the Illinois Central train station (the teletype was
 in some downtown Chicago office building, not far from the downtown Illinois
 Central terminus.
 Why not Rock Island? That would have been the obvious choice, but I don't
 know.
 Whatever.
 We are sitting there, and Doc Brown is proud of me, and praising me, and
 asking me how I did it, and maybe even incredulous, and I tell him, no
 I actually kind–of micro–cheated.
 I'd gotten most of the algo working on my own, but see I was not using
 a temp variable when swapping array entries, because I was completely totally
 certain I could do it without using a temp variable to cache the swapped
 value.
 That I could work around it, rearrange array values here and there.
 Using a temp variable seemed like a needless waste, inefficient and pointless.
 So my algo almost worked.
 Almost everything got sorted almost completely.
 And I was proud of that.
 I was almost there.
 Almost bug free.
 But time was running out, so I made a strategic choice: fuck it, I will
 sacrifice efficiency and performance, and copy the stupid array value into
 the stupid temp variable, and who fucking cares, maybe I'll get rid of
 that pesky temp variable in the next iteration.
 So I looked in the book, to see how the temp variable was being handled.
 And oh, yeah, of course, I already knew exactly where to slot that into
 my existing code.
 Literally a three–line change.
 Pretty trivial.
 So I did that, and my code worked.
 Today, I know that you cannot do bubble sort without that temp variable.
 Its central, unavoidable.
 But I was 16 years old, then and I did not know that.
 And I did not think about bubble sort ever again, for a few decades, at
 least, and by then, temp variables were second nature.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So my first FORTRAN program ever was bubble sort, written when I was 16
 years old.
 I debugged it in a day, on a teletype machine, written on punched paper
 tape.
 I think I still have that paper tape, somewhere.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, before college starts, its summertime, I know that I will have access
 to a computer in college, so I get this book from the public library on
 computer science.
 And it explains linked lists.
 And it explains how a polynomial can be encoded as a linked list.
 And I'm hot shit, this is the thing.
 So I write down pages and pages and pages of FORTRAN, implementing a computer
 algebra system that could add and subtract polynomials, and multiply them
 by a constant, and even multiply two polynomials together, and even divide
 them, but I was confused about remainders.
 Because I did not know about prime factors in this way.
 I knew long division, but I also knew something was out of control, because
 I could see that 1/(1+x) caused an infinite loop, and I did not understand
 how to terminate that loop.
 Mind you, I'm still sixteen, and this is all on paper.
 I didn't get this onto punch–cards until many months later.
 And friggin IBM JCL SSYSIN DD * was punching me in the kidneys, which took
 time away from debugging.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, anyway, my second FORTRAN program was for polynomial algebra, implemented
 with linked lists.
 maybe 100 maybe 120 lines of code, a decent–sized stack of punch cards.
 Not anywhere ner as the big fat piles of punch cards some people came in
 with: I was envious.
 They looked down on me as some weenie college freshman who didn't know
 anything.
 I was like 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

someday I'll show you and you won't even know it.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Except by then, I was bored of my linked–list polynomials, because it was
 more or less bug–free, it was quite easy to punch up, and it ran flawlessly,
 and I could not think of anything interesting to do with it, so I was loosing
 interest.
 And right around that time, I also learned or re–discovered or heard that
 LISP was an even better way of doing this, and I kind of knew and understood
 car and cdr and cadr, and even had three or five punch cards of LISP, and
 that's when SYSIN DD * started punching down.
 Because you don't just say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

PRINT
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in LISP, that is not how LISP works.
 So where the fuck does the output go? Into thin air, somwhere, and the
 help desk guy goes, will, its obvious, you have to arrange an output device.
 Here's the JCL manual.
 And the JCL manual is like 300 pages long, and maybe it mentions LISP exactly
 once, and it does not explain how to make a LISP program generate output.
 So I'm randomly trying shit, and none of of, absolutely none of it works.
 And I complain, and this guy goes: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

hey, you know, time share
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

get rid of the card deck.
 Here's a teletype, there's only three of them in the room, and they are
 always taken nine to five, but come back after hours, and you can sit there
 and do TOPS 20 instead of fucking around with card decks and waiting for
 the batch scheduling system to run your job, and staring at the Hazeltine
 terminal next to the window where you submit large jobs and pick up your
 printer output.
 Whatever.
 I could go on like this and relay my entire freshman year at U of Chicago,
 and the 3AM debugging sessions.
 I swear, I got dumber as I go older.
 I look back on those days, and I was ...
 well, I was really pretty smart.
 Not brilliant, but smart.
 Looking back I wonder, its like I got stupid as I got older.
 I dunno.
 WTF.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So anyway, in my dream, I am explaining, on the blackboard, this polynomial
 linked–list computer algebra system.
 And in my dream I'm saying 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

See? This is how it works.
 it's pretty clear.
 Just do that.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and the person I'm talking to is, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

oh yeah
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and the dream sort of fades by that point.
 And I'm now half–awake.
 and I lie there, and I'm thinking back to the SGI OpenInventor system,
 a three–dee graphics system, built on top of IrisGL/OpenGL.
 I'd been at IBM for three or four years by then, I was the OpenGL architect.
 I understood how Inventor worked.
 It was a kind of super-duper ultra polynomial linked–list system, kind–of–ish,
 but 3D color graphics.
 And I sit down to implement it, to recreate it from scratch, because SGI
 does not want to license it, or maybe SGI does want to license it, but
 they want too much money.
 Or the IBM executives are not interested, or something, and I am too stupid
 to talk to IBM executives.
 So instead I stupidly decide I am going to code up, from scratch, on my
 own, a work–alike of SGI's Inventor.
 Because basically, its easy, its fun, no one cares, whatever.
 And Marc Andressen is hanging out, and the world wide web doesn't exist
 yet, and I'm telling Marc all about my 3D system, and one day he comes
 back and says 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

yeah, and it should run over the net
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and I'm like Marc, what the fuck that's stupid.
 How the fuck can 3D run over the net? You're just saying random shit now.
 And I throw him out of the office.
 Next summer, six months later, he sens me a copy of NCSA Mosaic, version
 0.8 or 0.9 or something.
 He had written it.
 and I'm like 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

whoa...
 this is ..
 interesting.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 The pulldown menu has telnet in it but that feels stupid.
 It has FTP in it and that feels boring.
 And Archie and Gopher and Veronica, and I have some vague idea of that
 that is.
 Something FTP–like, build on top of FTP, and yeah it works.
 Cool.
 I can surface distant FTP sites from a browser.
 And the very last entry in the pull–down menu is HTTP.
 And I'm like 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

What's HTTP? Lets try that.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and that's when it goes whoa, I did not expect that.
 Because I'm staring at the worlds first web–sites ever.
 Oh, I skipped a few parts of the story.
 The summer before that, I am driving Marc home in my car, and we are talking
 network protocols, for the web, and like AFS server is licensed and proprietary
, and that sucks, and NFS is security–hole–of–the–week club, utterly unsafe
 on the open internet.
 Telnet is pointless, and FTP is a huge pile of cruft that is not needed,
 he tells me.
 Most of what is in FTP is just not needed.
 So what should be do? And he says maybe he'll create a slimmed–down, cut–down
 version of FTP.
 And we don't know it then, but that is what HTTP ends up being.
 I mean, other people create HTTP, but its right place, right time.
 Whatever.
 I knew Marc.
 Got together with him many times before and since, but not for decades,
 our paths have parted.
 he is now associated with the evil Trump, somehow has become evil himself.
 He was young and sweet and 18 years old when I knew him.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So where was I? So SGI's OpenInventor is like this 3D version of a linked–list,
 I'm thinking, half–asleep, waking from my dream.
 And I'm thinking, whatever happened to that code I wrote? I called it 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

3Doors
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 – 3D Object–Oriented Rendering System.
 A play on Windows.
 Doors, for your X–Windows.
 You didn't have to just look out the window any more, you could step out
 the door.
 Andrew Taylor wanted to give it a different name.
 I forget what.
 And I'm thinking, half–asleep, where did that code go? Its probably on
 my website somewhere.
 I mean, you can probably find it.
 Good chance that Internet Archive scraped it and is preserving a copy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And I was thinking ...
 I've shat out all these little blibs and blobs of code.
 They're now useless, pointless.
 obsolete, of course.
 and I've left behind these little piles of turds in my past, and that is
 when it comes to me: as an agent, as a living being, I am a lot like one
 of those sea–bed tube–worms, eating things and shitting out these little
 intellectual turds.
 The turds are in the past: not in the here–and–now, but a part of the historica
l past, frozen, unchangeable records, like a fossils record from some pre–Cambri
an era.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And I'm thinking, well, isn't all intellectual product like this? Those
 pieces of software I wrote: the polynomial algebra system, that never connected
 with anything.
 It sits there, a disconnected lump in the fossil record of the past.
 Other things connect: when I talk to people, they hear what I say, and
 they do something with what it is that they have heard.
 So my spoken words, uttered to living humans, these connect in a way that
 my defunct software does not.
 And this is the web of life, isn't it? We are all just chattering agents,
 shitting out little blebs of information–containing turds into the historical
 past.
 Some of these informational extrusions find a receiving end, like another
 human, who hears them, or even a dog, who hears me say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Go fetch! Sit!
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 those words, that informational extrusion, does connect, and it connects
 more strongly that my obsolete 3Doors software ever could.
 But anyway, that is what humans are: lowly worms shitting out pieces of
 information.
 Not even big pieces: just little pieces, of variable size.
 Some smaller some larger, none particularly impressive.
 And then I wake, and stumble downstairs to find coffee.
 And, two coffee cups in, I decide to write this diary entry.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So is this perception important? This little idea of humans as agents running
 around, shitting out little pieces of information to one–another, into
 the historical record? I dunno.
 On the one hand, it is stupid and obvious, now that I explained it.
 It is also demeaning, since 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

humans are so much more than that
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

: we are not worms.
 But it is clear we are not the end of the evolutionary chain.
 Maybe I should compare humans to bacteria: bacteria eat and shit too, and
 human intellectual ability is so tiny, so minuscule, that we are barely
 hardly at all more intelligent than bacteria.
 We are only a tiny bit smarter than bacteria.
 This is a humbling thought.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I don't know.
 The above text details a silly, almost trivial idea, and yet it provides
 a kind of organizing framework for how to think about informational flows
 through the universe, through here–and–now, through agents embedded in
 and acting through an informational matrix of connectivity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh, and I almost forgot: my waking project is to hah hah.
 don't laugh, to create a linked–list polynomial–manipulating computer algebra
 system.
 Metaphorically speaking of course: I work with jigsaw pieces, now, not
 linked lists.
 But its not so different: to each jigsaw, I assign only a small dollop
 of data, in the same way that the coefficient of a polynomial is a small
 dollop.
 So my dream crossed paths with my reality, and isn't that interesting?
 Life is a wonder.
 I sit here, almost overwhelemed in awe of the spectacle before me.
 I watch, and shit just happens.
 And I touch, and shit happens in response.
 Life is truly a miracle.
 This is perhaps the worlds best–kept secret.
 its shouted out from mountain–tops: life is a miracle! Who hears those
 words? Everyone.
 No one.
 Almost everyone who hears those words don't know what they mean.
 And maybe if they pause and reflect, the reaction is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

yeah, sure, so what
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and thence on to the next thing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Which is what I have to do now.
 Go on to the next thing.
 There's a different, related brainstorm.
 Or maybe this same brainstorm.
 But that brainstorm, I can convert to actual formluas and algorithms, so
 let me work on that.
 Later, dude.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
18 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fleeky tells me to write to Joscha at CIMC.
 Here's draft email version one, but I don't like it.
 I will erase this and try again:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Hi Joscha,
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
A friend has told me that I should contact you with regards to CIMC.
 So that is what this is.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
I don't think you're aware of any of the work I've done w.r.t machine consciousnes
s.
 This is entirely my fault.
 I've utterly failed to self-promote, and given the nature of collective
 intelligence, this implies that I have little influence on modern thinking
 about machine consciousness.
 So it goes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
I think I can provide useful viewpoints and commentary on your work, on
 the work of CIMC.
 Perhaps you don't agree.
 I, uhh, am entirely capable of reading body language and social signals,
 and so I understand.
 Still, I feel it appropriate to wave "hi" in your direction, and remind
 you that, well, we're all in this together.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
...
 foo.
 This feels weak and limp.
 He'll ignore it.
 I want him to not ignore it.
 Why? Because I'm proud, I want to be recognized.
 I have an ego that needs to be nurtured.
 At the same time, I'm gruff and say things that piss people off: I'm an
 asshole.
 And finally, my contributions to science are indeed quite small.
 So what's really going on? A mad scramble to protect my own personal future,
 which in the short term includes health and financial goals.
 And one way of protecting the latter is to be aligned with the interests
 of the powerful, the thought leaders in the field.
 So it is vital to maintain good connections.
 This is my rationalization of what it is that I am doing here.
 There is also an undertow of assorted emotional turmoil, tangled up with
 pride and ego: feelings resonate.
 I want to be acknowledged, admired, looked upon with respect.
 All those things that most normies want.
 This is not extinguishable, nor should it be extinguished.
 I can point at David Chapman and his buddhist practices to provide second–level
 support for this claim.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Am I wasting time here, writing in this diary, when I should be doing something
 more important? Perhaps.
 Like, for example, composing a better email to Joscha.
 Let's goooo.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here's what I sent:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
To: Joscha Bach joscha@cimc.ai
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Cc: Erik Newton erik@cimc.ai
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Hi Joscha, (also Hi Erik!)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
A friend has told me that I should contact you with regards to CIMC.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
You are not aware of any of the work I've done w.r.t.
 machine consciousness.
 This is entirely my fault.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
You're smart.
 I'll be direct.
 You can figure this out.
 In short: I can help with your work at CIMC.
 I would enjoy helping.
 Based on our prior social encounters, it seems clear enough that you perceive
 marginal utility in my participation.
 This email is intended to improve perceptions, to raise awareness, and
 to ask to be included in the proceedings.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Thank you for your consideration.
 -- Linas.
 Below follows some normie boilerplate about who I am, what I do, and why
 I do it.
 It is provided because often, normie boilerplate is an effective form of
 communication.
 I imagine your eyes will glaze over.
 So it goes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
p.s.
 Hi Erik, we have not met.
 The above was written addressing Joscha personally, as I've spent some
 fair amount of time conversing with him, and we have a personal relationship
 of sorts.
 I've decided it is wise to include you as well.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Resume: I'm widely read in almost all aspects of human intellectual endeavour.
 From the largest to the smallest: I understand how complex systems link
 together and form.
 I am conducting active research into sensori–motor systems, roughly aligned
 with the kinds of things Micheal Levin talks about, except I work with
 machines and math foundations and complex collective behavior.
 Aggregation, renormalization, phase transitions, critical self–organizing.
 I day–dream about the nature of love, the driver of pride (I write this
 email because I am proud), the mammalian and biological origins of the
 full spectrum of these.
 Upwards into the assortment of questions that buddhists and consciousness
 studies people write about.
 Downwards into those cute animal youtube videos that exhibit such "humanistic"
 features.
 I do not have any results in this area, but they burble in the background
 of my theorizing.
 I believe all intelligence is collective intelligence (there is a nice
 recent review article with exactly this title.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
I have a PhD in theoretical particle physics; I understand gravitation,
 quantum field theory, strings, black holes, cosmology, etc.
 and am widely read in mathematics.
 I've contributed paragraphs or more: entire articles to Wikipedia on arcane
 math topics.
 I am currently nursing along a theory about "here and now": why we cannot
 change the past, and why the future appears to be indeterminate.
 From what I can tell, this is intimately interconnected to the question
 of intelligence and consciousness.
 It is an extremely challenging topic.
 I'm actually rather shocked that it appears to be entirely ignored.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
For your entertainment: I've been working on a self–portrait diary.
 This is a large wall of text; stuff that I think about.
 I do not expect humans to read it; there's too much, and it's too meandering.
 But I imagine that soon there will be machinery that can convert this text
 into a simulacrum of me, and so, if you have any curiosity about who I
 am, what I think, or my opinions on this or that, and I'm not around to
 reply personally, you'll be able to ask that portrait.
 I can also explain all the ways in which this may not work.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
That's all.
 Again, I'd like to maintain relations with CIMC, or even to participate
 in CIMC activities.
 But this is up to you.
 I'm here, I am waving "hello" in your direction.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
-- Linas 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So it goes, so it goes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The thing I struggled with the most in writing the above is how not to be
 disassociative, distant, foreign, unempathetic.
 Recently, I've been looking at myself in a rather clinical fashion, as
 this diary attests in volumes.
 But this also pushes me into clinical analysis of other contacts.
 This requires me to consciously think about adding warmth to conversations.
 I can be warm, but then everything gets shallow, meaningless, personally
 unfulfilling to me.
 It becomes trite and stupid.
 I mean, I enjoy petting cats and dogs.
 I do not enjoy figuratively petting humans.
 I don't want to interact with humans as if they are stupid, but well, most
 of them are, and its not fun.
 And so when I want to reach into higher abstractive layers, and talk about
 complex topics using telegraphic language, it starts to feel very disassociated.
 It's like I am here, in my mind, thinking these things, but I have to select
 language to communicate there, to these other human beings who are kind
 of very far away and detached from the presence that I am in.
 This is almost a clinical definition of disassociation (I have not looked
 at the clinical definition in many years, so maybe I mis-recall.) And I
 am quite aware that everyone: every living thing is stuck in the same situation.
 Most living things are not aware of this, and warmth and connection flow
 freely and easily.
 Well.
 For some.
 Others wage war, and exhibit 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

dark triad
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 personality traits.
 There's that too.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Whatever.
 its all quite weird.
 It's getting late, and if I don't go hop on my bicycle now, it will get
 dark before I'm done.
 Later.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
20 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Dream sequences, continued.
 While falling asleep, I thought about wave function collapse, again.
 I'll keep it short.
 A reasonable model seems to an array of single–pixel antennas, each sufficientl
y sensitive to detect a single photon with some reasonable efficiency.
 This array is illuminated with a weak source, having some spatial pattern
 (two–slit, whatever, doesn't matter.) We know from basic QM that only a
 single pixel can ever trigger: the wide–field illumination 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

collapses
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 down to a single pixel.
 The hypothesis is that in order for this to happen, the photon must be
 conceived of as a topological soliton of some kind, so as to obtain the
 desired behavior of wave–function collapse.
 That is, when the pixel array is illuminated, the brightness is such that
 one unit of 
\begin_inset Formula $E=h\nu$
\end_inset

 impinges on it per observation time.
 We want to be able to provide a mathematical model for this, that prevents
 the observation of 2,3,...
 photons of energy 
\begin_inset Formula $h\nu/2$
\end_inset

 or 
\begin_inset Formula $h\nu/3$
\end_inset

 ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How can this interaction be turned into a plausible mathematical setting?
 I'm thinking that modeling each pixel as a dipole antenna is the place
 to start, and to treat the photon as a standard crossed electric–magnetic
 wave maybe I guess with linear polarization.
 It's unclear if polarization matters.
 The goal is to look at this mathematical structure, and look for something
 that has the characteristics topological soliton in it.
 Seems like a good idea, right?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, now that I am awake (well, even as I was sleeping) there seems to be
 a bit of an issue: what is the sensitivity of each dipole? More correctly,
 what is the frequency response for each dipole? If the frequency response
 goes below 
\begin_inset Formula $\nu/2$
\end_inset

 then I see no reason why a single 
\begin_inset Formula $E=h\nu$
\end_inset

 photon might not trigger two antennas.
 Shit like this happens all the time: high–energy events make lots and lots
 of detectors light up, with a large variety of physical mechanisms for
 doing so.
 So the ability to detect single photons also seems to require that each
 antenna be insensitive to frequencies much below the photon frequency.
 This provides the topological constraint.
 There has to be a threshold: an energy threshold, a mass–gap.
 This is exactly what the photo–electric effect demonstrates.
 The band–gap in the metal provides the barrier that prevents more than
 one electron being ejected by a single photon.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What is the mathematical articulation of this? Treat this as a problem in
 homotopy.
 At one end, we have an E&M field describing radiation in free space.
 What is the homotopic map that takes this field, and maps it to a single
 pixel detector? Presumably, this map is not just homotopic, but diffeo,
 as well.
 Treating each pixel as a dipole antenna seems reasonable.
 It gives something to work with.
 The dipole then converts the EM field to an oscillation on a pair of wires:
 it removes confusion about polarization, it eliminates the wave equation,
 and no long requires thinking about the EM field: instead, just an oscillating
 scalar potential on a pair of wires.
 At the end of the wires, one can place a conventional hi–pass filter.
 This eliminates the need to think about other quantum effects.
 That is, in 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

real life
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, a single–pixel detector has to be either (a) some kind of semi–conductor
 with some band–gap, or (b) some kind of silver–halide on some photographic
 film, i.e.
 a many–body system in some thermal bath, or (c) some photomultiplier tube,
 again a many–body system with some band–gap in the metal, or (d) some rhodopsin
 or chlorophyll molecule, potentially getting into superposition with the
 photon.
 All of these are distractors and complexifiers of the problem.
 All of them introduce new conceptual elements that are hard to control
 for.
 By contrast, the mathematical description of a transmission line attached
 to a high–pass filter is unambiguous.
 Engineering texts have the formula for this.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this mathematical model, we can then dispense the EM field entirely,
 get rid of the dipole antennas, get rid of the transmission line from the
 dipoles to the filter.
 The mathematical model is then a pixel array of high–pass filters, illuminated
 by a scalar potential field on the input to the filter.
 To further simplify, I suppose we can even ground one side of the filter,
 attach it to a common, so that we really do have a single–wire input.
 So that's the model.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Now, this array of filters is illuminated by a scale field carrying energy
 
\begin_inset Formula $E=h\nu$
\end_inset

 and the filter frequency cutoff is above 
\begin_inset Formula $\nu/2$
\end_inset

 (of course).
 In conventional passive electronics, nothing depends on intensity or power
 (i.e.
 has a linear dependence).
 Only amplifiers, tube circuits, transistor circuits, diodes have a non–linear
 response.
 So I guess our filter has to be attached to some non–linear element, so
 that it triggers only when there is enough energy dumped into that element?
 Again, to keep things simple, I guess we want to just make up some very
 simple non–linear element that outputs a zero or a one, generating zero,
 of below an energy threshold, else generating a one above that threshold.
 So, a sigmoid function of some kind.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, now the mathematical model is that of a pixel array of sigmoids, which
 trigger only if they absorb an amount of energy to push them above a threshold.
 To recap: this array is illuminated by a very weak illumination, say, thousands
 or millions of times weaker than the detection threshold.
 From this wen want to obtain a mathematical description such that energy
 is conserved.
 Lets take these last few sentences and write some algebra for them.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So: Let there 
\begin_inset Formula $N$
\end_inset

 pixels.
 Each pixel is labelled as 
\begin_inset Formula $d_{i}$
\end_inset

 standing for 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

detector at location 
\begin_inset Formula $i$
\end_inset


\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Each detector accepts as input a single real number, the instantaneous
 power 
\begin_inset Formula $p$
\end_inset

.
 This power is a function of time, 
\begin_inset Formula $p=p\left(t\right)$
\end_inset

 and is seems unavoidable to assume that each detector integrates over time,
 so that the energy absorbed over a time interval 
\begin_inset Formula $\Delta t$
\end_inset

 is given by 
\begin_inset Formula $E\left(\Delta t\right)=\int_{0}^{\Delta t}p\left(t\right)dt$
\end_inset

.
 The power is position–dependent, so we may as well write 
\begin_inset Formula $p_{i}=p_{i}\left(t\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $E_{i}=E_{i}\left(\Delta t\right)$
\end_inset

.
 The detector response function is then
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
d_{i}\left(E_{i}\right)=\begin{cases}
1 & \mbox{if }E_{i}\ge h\nu\\
0 & \mbox{if }E_{i}<h\nu
\end{cases}
\]

\end_inset

The detector then 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

fires
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and resets back to the zero state.
 (This concept of firing can be firmed up, but I'm lazy for now; you get
 the idea, I think.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This detector array is then illuminated with some non–uniform wave, carrying
 a total power of 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
p_{tot}=\sum_{i=1}^{N}p_{i}
\]

\end_inset

Assume that 
\begin_inset Formula $p_{tot}$
\end_inset

 does NOT vary with time: it is a constant.
 That is, perhaps there is a time variation in the individual power 
\begin_inset Formula $p_{i}=p_{i}\left(t\right)$
\end_inset

 at a given detector 
\begin_inset Formula $i$
\end_inset

 but this variation cancels out across all detectors.
 (Stupid fun and games: set 
\begin_inset Formula $p_{tot}=1$
\end_inset

.
 This reminds you of what?) Anyway, the total power over a time interval
 
\begin_inset Formula $\Delta t$
\end_inset

, the total illumination is
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
E_{tot}=p_{tot}\Delta t
\]

\end_inset

which increases linearly over time.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, the above lays out the notation.
 The mathematical model that we wish to discover is one where exactly one
 detector 
\begin_inset Formula $d_{i}$
\end_inset

 fires whenever 
\begin_inset Formula $h\nu\le E_{tot}<2h\nu$
\end_inset

.
 Perhaps we want to loosen the time constraint, and allow for the case where
 
\begin_inset Formula $k$
\end_inset

 detectors have fired when 
\begin_inset Formula $kh\nu\le E_{tot}<kh\nu+\varepsilon$
\end_inset

 for some 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

small
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 
\begin_inset Formula $\varepsilon$
\end_inset

.
 If, in addition, the detectors have an efficiency less than 100%, we want
 to derate proportionately.
 This is meant to be statistical, so perhaps the detector rate of firing
 needs to be a Poisson process, so that only the average is maintained,
 while uncertainty over small time periods is allowed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And this word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

statistical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 creates huge issues.
 The problem is that, once we use the word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

statistical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, we enter the conventional regime where anything goes, as long as averages
 are conserved.
 There are an infinite number of purely deterministic power distributions
 
\begin_inset Formula $p_{i}\left(t\right)$
\end_inset

 that give the desired result of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

one wave–function collapse per 
\begin_inset Formula $\Delta t$
\end_inset


\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 This entirely abandons the original idea of associating a photon with some
 topological index (that ties together the field with the array of detectors.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I see two possible directions for cures.
 One is to reformulate the above to incorporate a Bell measurement.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another possible cure is to eliminate local time.
 For this case, set 
\begin_inset Formula $p_{i}\left(t\right)=const.$
\end_inset

 so that the conventional idea of constant illumination is retained.
 This is problematic, though: the illuminating source is presumably dribbling
 out photons one at a time, so that in fact it is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

dark
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 most of the time, and then the source generates a photon, which does it's
 welcher–weg thing, and then some detector pops off.
 Another wild idea is to dismiss the notion of linearly–advancing gallilean
 local time, and leave the progress of time ambiguous at each detector.
 This is a reuptake of the here–and–now framework, where we don't really
 know about how the detectors 
\begin_inset Formula $d_{i}$
\end_inset

 fired, until much later, when we accumulate the classical bits issued by
 each detector back to a single location, where we can verify that, indeed,
 only one detector fired per acceptable interval 
\begin_inset Formula $\Delta t$
\end_inset

.
 What a fucking mess.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One practical problem is that there is a zoo of topological invariants.
 I don't really know this zoo very well.
 Of course, there is the usual sphere mapping.
 Then the assortment of examples from textbooks on algebraic topology.
 None of the examples that I recall seeing are pixelated.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

firing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is suggestive, both from lightning strikes, insulator breakdown, and from
 neural nets.
 The model here is that charge accumulates until the insulator beaks down,
 the charge discharges, and then the process begins anew.
 Perhaps this could be converted into a plausible model of wave function
 collapse, except that such a model is stochastic.
 It needs to be reformulated in a Bell–measurement setting.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So round and round we go, in circles.
 I picked pixels, because it seemed like this would provide some sort of
 simplification.
 But now it doesn't, and I have to do Bell? Why is that?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, hmm.
 I'm confused.
 If I redo the work above, and add appropriate spin–up and spin–down indexes
 on each of the formulas, and then demand that Bell holds, all that happens
 is a description where 
\begin_inset Formula $p_{i}=\left|\psi_{i}\right|^{2}$
\end_inset

 and the complex field 
\begin_inset Formula $\psi_{i}$
\end_inset

 is attached to philosophical arguments that it is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

physical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 This recapitulates age–old arguments and does not provide new understanding.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I should mention, at this point, that an earlier stage of the dream was
 a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

revelation
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that classical physical reality takes place not in three dimensions, but
 in a very high–dimensional space, say for example, a space of 
\begin_inset Formula $2^{256}\approx10^{80}$
\end_inset

 dimensions and that the proceedings there are conventional geometry, and
 that the apparent 3D physical reality with its assorted QM/QFT features
 that we live in is the result of a projection–correspondence of topological
 phenomena from that high–dimensional space down to here and now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Of course, no naive projection from high to low dimensions pops up, except
 for a pixelized version.
 And so this suggests a search of high–dimensional geometric phenomena that
 resemble quantum–like behavior in lower dimensions.
 And, I suppose 3D would be some critical dimension, but clearly we are
 not ready for that.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I think I've hit the end of the road for the above chain of thought.
 There's nowhere to go, or perhaps, too many directions to go in.
 Everything shimmers on the horizon, but these shimmers, they are unlikely
 to be real.
 Like the traveler on the desert chasing the mirage, I risk dying of thirst
 before I ever reach water.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The other curious thing about the above dozen or two paragraphs is how much
 my thinking is constrained by the history of everything I've ever studied
 before.
 All that my mind is doing is wandering over bits and pieces of things I
 know, and trying to reassemble them in novel combinations.
 Is it a lattice model, like an Ising Model? Check.
 Maybe wave–function collapse resembles domain formation in 2D Ising models
 or something like that.
 Who the fuck knows, its possible.
 What does it take to break out of the meager collection of tools and techniques
 I am familiar with? A bit of luck, a bit of effort.
 Err, a lot of luck and a lot of effort.
 I'm mired in the mud.
 The intellect thrashes about.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Whatever.
 I have several other projects to attend to.
 Perhaps better luck with those.
 Later, dude.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
24 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Reading this article: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Complex harmonics reveal low–dimensional manifolds of critical brain dynamics.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Gustavo Deco, Yonatan Sanz Perl, and Morten L.
 Kringelbach https://journals.aps.org/pre/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevE.111.014410
 It talks a lot about long–range neurons and how these modulate avalanching
 behavior near the critical point, although that talk is mostly hand–waving.
 i.e.
 I don't get it.
 Sexy buzzwords, but I don't understand.
 Maybe if I read about teh Hopf Model, I would.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Anyway, this sentence jumps out at me: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

T
\emph on
his suggests that the long–range interactions are less relevant in deep
 sleep, which is thus likely to exhibit less critical dynamics than wakefulness
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 So, if I might make wild associations: perhaps what I call 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

decisions
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 or 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

resolution of choices
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 are associated with avalanches.
 That is, the system is teetering on the edge, in some metastable state,
 and it can go in many different ways.
 The final decision made is associated with an avalanche.
 The avalanche is the mechanism for amplifying a small perturbation and
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

making it so
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Perhaps a way of broadcasting to the entire brain that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

this is what we are doing now, get with the program
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here's my more formal writeup:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Abstract: A framework called CHARM ("Complex Harmonics Decompostion"), applied
 to 1000 fMRI scans.
 Describes role of long-distance neural connections in modulating critical
 avalanches.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The meta-setting of the paper, as best as I can understand it: 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
A characteristic of self-organized systems near criticality is that they
 exhibit avalanches (in the sense of sand-piles).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The human brain (brains in general) operate as self-organized systems near
 criticality.
 I think this is called "the Hopf Model" (not sure).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Thinking (and fast decision making) is best understood as sequences of avalanche
s.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Long-range neurons modulate the avalanches.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
This modulation happens only during waking hours, and not during sleep.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The CHARM technique is a new and better tool for exposing all this.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My personal inspiration, having little to do with the paper itself: 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
When I introspect, and think about things, I often feel like I have a menu
 of choices in front of me: what to say next, what to do next, what to write
 next.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The hardest part of writing/talking is to pick through that menu-choice.
 This is a characteristic symptom of ADHD, autism.
 (I am not ADHD/autistic.
 I can empathize with the "overwhelming flood of stimulous" that is another
 common description of ADHD/autism.
 And likewise the concept of "stimming".) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
I assume that the avalanches seen in the fMRI data are associated with these
 rapid, short-time-scale choices.
 That is, a few times a second, I decide "do this and do not do that", and
 that this decision is associated with an avalanche.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The role of the long-range neurons is to consolidate this decision over
 the whole brain.
 Basically, to announce far and wide "this is what we're doing now, get
 with the program".
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Avalanches amplify tiny, microscopic imbalances into large changes.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
This is part of the mechanism in which "free will" expresses itself.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm now reading 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

The Hopf whole-brain model and its linear approximation
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Adrián Ponce-Alvarez Gustavo Deco, https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1083108
3/
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Distracted.
 Reading https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hopf_bifurcation but its fucked up.
 The section labelled 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

intuition
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is not intuitive.
 Can we fix it?
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{dz}{dt}=z\left(\left(\lambda+i\right)+b|z|^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

Let 
\begin_inset Formula $z=re^{i\theta}$
\end_inset

 so 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{z}=\dot{r}e^{i\theta}+i\dot{\theta}re^{i\theta}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $b=\alpha+i\beta$
\end_inset

 so
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\dot{r}e^{i\theta}+i\dot{\theta}re^{i\theta} & =re^{i\theta}\left(\lambda+i\right)+\left(\alpha+i\beta\right)r^{3}e^{i\theta}\\
\dot{r}+i\dot{\theta}r & =r\left(\lambda+i\right)+\left(\alpha+i\beta\right)r^{3}\\
\frac{\dot{r}}{r}+i\dot{\theta} & =\lambda+i+\left(\alpha+i\beta\right)r^{2}\\
\dot{r} & =r\left(\lambda+i-i\dot{\theta}+\left(\alpha+i\beta\right)r^{2}\right)
\end{align*}

\end_inset

Since 
\begin_inset Formula $r$
\end_inset

 is real, we must have that the imaginary part of the last eqn vanishes,
 so that
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\dot{\theta}=1+\beta r^{2}
\]

\end_inset

and the real parts give
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\dot{r}=r\left(\lambda+\alpha r^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

Rescale time so that 
\begin_inset Formula $\alpha t=\tau$
\end_inset

 so that 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\dot{r}=\frac{dr}{dt}=\alpha\frac{dr}{d\tau}
\]

\end_inset

Define 
\begin_inset Formula $\omega=1/\alpha$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\mu=\lambda\omega$
\end_inset

 and plug through to get
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{dr}{d\tau}=r\left(\mu+r^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

and
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\frac{d\theta}{d\tau}=\omega\left(1+\beta r^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

and the wikipedia form is recovered by setting 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta=0$
\end_inset

.
 I'm not sure why anyone thinks this is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

intuitive
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Gahh.
 Look at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stuart%E2%80%93Landau_equation and
 from what I can tell, it is identical to the Hopf bifurcation, up to rescaling.
 More, it gives an explicit solution.
 Lets check it out: 
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\dot{r} & =r\left(\lambda+\alpha r^{2}\right)\\
\frac{\dot{r}}{r^{3}} & =\frac{\lambda}{r^{2}}+\alpha\\
 & =\frac{d}{dt}\left(\frac{-1}{2r^{2}}\right)
\end{align*}

\end_inset

which is linear in 
\begin_inset Formula $\zeta=r^{-2}$
\end_inset

 so
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\dot{\zeta} & =-2\left(\lambda\zeta+\alpha\right)\\
 & =-2\lambda\left(\zeta+\frac{\alpha}{\lambda}\right)
\end{align*}

\end_inset

Absorbing the const: 
\begin_inset Formula $\eta=\zeta+\alpha/\lambda$
\end_inset

 gives 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{\eta}=-2\lambda\eta$
\end_inset

 which is solved by 
\begin_inset Formula $\eta=Ce^{-2\lambda t}$
\end_inset

.
 Plugging through, 
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\frac{1}{r^{2}} & =Ce^{-2\lambda t}-\frac{\alpha}{\lambda}\\
r\left(t\right) & =\sqrt{\frac{1}{Ce^{-2\lambda t}-\alpha/\lambda}}\\
r_{0}=r\left(0\right) & =\sqrt{\frac{1}{C-\alpha/\lambda}}\\
C= & \frac{1}{r_{0}^{2}}+\frac{\alpha}{\lambda}
\end{align*}

\end_inset

So (yuck!?)
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
r\left(t\right)=r_{0}\sqrt{\frac{\lambda}{\left(\lambda+\alpha r_{0}^{2}\right)e^{-2\lambda t}-\alpha r_{0}^{2}}}
\]

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next, we want the Jacobian matrix.
 It can be read off directly from the two eqns 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{\theta}=1+\beta r^{2}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{r}=r\left(\lambda+\alpha r^{2}\right)$
\end_inset

.
 The Jacobian matrix is
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
J=\left[\begin{array}{cc}
\frac{\partial\dot{r}}{\partial r} & \frac{\partial\dot{r}}{\partial\theta}\\
\frac{\partial\dot{\theta}}{\partial r} & \frac{\partial\dot{\theta}}{\partial\theta}
\end{array}\right]=\left[\begin{array}{cc}
\lambda+3\alpha r^{2} & 0\\
2\beta r & 0
\end{array}\right]
\]

\end_inset

The characteristic polynomial in 
\begin_inset Formula $w$
\end_inset

 is
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
P\left(w\right)=\det\left[J-wI\right]=-w\left(\lambda+3\alpha r^{2}-w\right)
\]

\end_inset

There are two eigenvalues: 
\begin_inset Formula $w=0$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $w=\lambda+3\alpha r^{2}$
\end_inset

.
 Yuck.
 This is not the intent.
 We wanted a pair of pure imaginary eigenvalues and we blew it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Does this work in cartesian coords? Let try.
 Set 
\begin_inset Formula $z=x+iy$
\end_inset

 and start with
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\frac{dz}{dt} & =z\left(\left(\lambda+i\right)+b|z|^{2}\right)\\
 & =\left(x+iy\right)\left(\lambda+i\right)+b\left(x+iy\right)\left(x^{2}+y^{2}\right)
\end{align*}

\end_inset

The split into real+imag parts is
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\dot{x} & =\lambda x-y+\left(\alpha x-\beta y\right)\left(x^{2}+y^{2}\right)\\
\dot{y} & =x+\lambda y+\left(\beta x+\alpha y\right)\left(x^{2}+y^{2}\right)
\end{align*}

\end_inset

The Jacobian is
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
J=\left[\begin{array}{cc}
\frac{\partial\dot{x}}{\partial x} & \frac{\partial\dot{x}}{\partial y}\\
\frac{\partial\dot{y}}{\partial x} & \frac{\partial\dot{y}}{\partial y}
\end{array}\right]=\left[\begin{array}{cc}
\lambda+3\alpha x^{2}-2\beta xy+\alpha y^{2}\quad & -1-3\beta y^{2}+2\alpha xy-\beta x^{2}\\
1+3\beta x^{2}+2\alpha xy+\beta y^{2}\quad & \lambda+3\alpha y^{2}+2\beta xy+\alpha x^{2}
\end{array}\right]
\]

\end_inset

Quite the mess.
 Linearize by setting 
\begin_inset Formula $x=y=0$
\end_inset

 to get
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
J=\left[\begin{array}{cc}
\lambda & -1\\
1 & \lambda
\end{array}\right]
\]

\end_inset

Then 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
P\left(w\right)=\det\left[J-wI\right]=\left(\lambda-w\right)^{2}+1
\]

\end_inset

which has solution 
\begin_inset Formula $P\left(w\right)=0$
\end_inset

 given by
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
w=\lambda\pm i
\]

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I copied all of this to the Wikipedia article.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
29 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Time for a progress report.
 As always, perhaps the act of writing will reveal something.
 As always, this will be a semi–incoherent ramble.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So a few days ago, fleeky reminds me of the gamedev 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

quantum collapse algorithm
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 ...
 its not really 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

quantum collapse
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 but the name is suggestive.
 It's basically an aggregation algorithm, where given some seed, additional
 pieces/tiles aggregate onto it.
 Or with multiple seeds, they attach and grow out from the seed.
 I'd forgotten this algo, but its very much in line with how I'm trying
 to visualize here–and–now.
 So I start thinking about it as I lay in bed, falling asleep.
 And here's the chain of thoughts:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The QCA is exactly right, because the jigsaws that are connected form the
 past, and it is unalterable, because they are now connected.
 The present, here–and–now, is where they are jockeying for position.
 The future remains unassembled.
 So this strongly feels like exactly the right model.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I imagine jigsaw pieces tiling in a hyperbolic way, so that the future is
 larger than the past.
 Why? Because somehow, the noosphere is expanding, and getting larger.
 There is more and more stuff, more an more complexity is arising.
 So, again, the jigsaw model confirms this intuitive understanding.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But somehow, the interferometer diamonds need to manifest, so as to get
 consistent histories.
 Bell's theorem must manifest during the construction process.
 How might that work? So I try to think microscopically.
 Consider a two–slit setup.
 A photon has to travel through both slits.
 Perhaps this can be done by the indeterminacy of the attached jigsaws?
 Welcher–weg is avoided because somehow the attachments of the jigsaws is
 still indeterminate.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But somehow, photons have to be blocked by the parts that are not slits.
 How does that work? Well, the photon hits a bunch of atoms.
 What's that? well, suppose a photon hits a single atom.
 What's that? Suppose it hits a hydrogen atom; but what is that? Well, its
 the Schrodinger eqn, but its a cloud exchanging virtual photons with a
 point–like positive charge (I'm sleeping here, so this is a dream–like
 hallucination.) What are those virtual photons? They emanate from the point
 positive charge, and spread out.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Then I think: perhaps there is no ambient space, and the 3D structure of
 space arises only as the pieces attach.
 But how to account for the inverse–square law? Somehow, there is a distance
 that the virtual photon travels.
 And inverse–square implies 3D, so here–and–now is perhaps partially–indetermina
te in dimension, but it has to collapse to 3D somehow.
 How? Well, there are 0-simplexes and 1-simplesex and 2-simplexes, and a
 space is 3D it the jigsaw connectors can form 2-simplexes and so the jigsaw
 has to have three connectors pointing towards the past, and I guess three
 connectors pointing towards the future.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But this model if discrete jigsaws is all wrong; in the end, I want to revert
 to conventional, smooth differentiable behavior, so the jigsaws have to
 be infinitessimally tiny.
 So I guess they are actually differentials, or behave like differentials.
 So, I imagine the dot–product of two gradients, but one gradient points
 in the backwards–time direction, and one points in the future–time direction.
 And then its morning and I wake up, and here I am writing this, thinking
 wtf am I going to do now?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm stumped.
 I'm stupid.
 I'm lazy.
 This is hard.
 It's unpromising.
 But it seems plausible.
 Developing this into a real theory seems nearly insurmountable.
 Maybe its impossible.
 Maybe its important.
 Fuck me.
 What should I do? Does it matter? Do something.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Some inspirational wikipedia articles:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calculus_of_moving_surfaces Reminds me of the
 ADM formalism to solve Einestins eqns.
 by propagating forward a space–like surface.
 (Its a Hamiltonian formalism)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carleman_linearization converts non--linear
 dynamical systems into infinite–dimensional linear ones.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carr%C3%A9_du_champ_operator – is a bilinear,
 symmetric operator measures how far an infinitesimal generator is from
 being a derivation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These are three random articles starting with the letters 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Ca
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that seem somehow relevant to what I'm daydreaming about with the here–and–now.
 But its all uphill, from here.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
29 April 2025 Later on
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I've got writer's block.
 Except it's inventor's block.
 I've got these ideas.
 They've barricaded themselves in.
 They refuse to come out.
 I need those ideas to manifest.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
30 April 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Reading 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

An Interview with Dunja Šešelja, Samuli Reijula, and Matteo Michelin
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 https://riviste.unimi.it/index.php/thereasoner/article/view/28587/24047 and
 this sentence jumps out: 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

is a scientific community better off if its members favor pursuing theories
 that have a larger explanatory scope than the rivals, or should scientists
 instead remain committed to their current theories— even if their scope
 is more limited—until they suffer from too many anomalies in comparison
 to the rivals?
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 I found this remarkable since it has the inbuilt assumption that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

larger explanatory scope
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is always a win.
 If the prototype is Einstein's General Relativity vs.
 Newtonian Gravitation, then yes, the former has larger explanatory scope.
 But psychologically, this pushes many to propose 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

theories of everything
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, consisting of vague general principles that are overly broad, claiming
 to justify everything, while proving almost nothing.
 Odd.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A variant of this showed up a week ago in the Michael Bennett paper, making
 a general claim that the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

weakest
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 system that can explain something is the best system.
 It tries to but fails to provide a coherent mathematical description of
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

weak
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, but it seems to claim this: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

weak
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 systems are those that fit the data well, and do not make strong or broad
 claims outside of the domain of fitness.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In general, we tend to have a patchwork of domain–specific theories, that
 are then patched together.
 Perhaps sometimes, some structure can be perceived in that patchwork, resulting
 in the creation of a theory with 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

larger explanatory scope
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Hmm.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm also struck by a different problem: what if there are two or more theories
 with 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

larger explanatory scope
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and suppose one stumbles over the crappier one first? Well, one then hits
 a metastable state that can effectively block progress towards the larger,
 more complex theory.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
2 May 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Context: Yesterday, Asher Crispe asks me about free will, and I respond
 with the standard lecture about bifurcation points and Sinai's tongues.
 Later that night, I am reviewing Wikipedia, and notice that someone marked
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Ergodic Theory
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 as top priority.
 It links prominently to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Ergodicity
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, of which I wrote the entire informal intro.
 Which sits untouched.
 I think I did a good job of it.
 So I re–read it.
 l re–read what I wrote years ago.
 It's decent.
 OK.
 Shaggy in parts, but OK.
 And I get to thinking that perhaps 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the past
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is a relic of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

here and now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that becomes so strongly entangled, that it cannot be picked apart any
 more.
 This is distinct from my earlier idea that the past involves the closure
 of all quantum interferometers.
 Which may also be the case.
 But on the surface, these are disconnected ideas.
 And the mental note to myself is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

think about this some more
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

well, maybe the reason the past can't be changed is because it tipped over
 an entanglement threshold.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 And the natural threshold there would be Planck's constant (?) in that
 the phase–space volume of gas–in–a–box is 3 position + 3 velocity for one
 atom, and its 6^Avogadro's number for ordinary–scale things, which is so
 much crazy–larger than Planck's constant that the combinatoric possibilities
 there have crossed the irreversibility threshold.
 This is trite, but one moment.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So this morning, I am staring at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Woodall%27s_conject
ure and the definition of dicuts, dijoins and strongly connected graphs,
 and am reminded of last nights reading of the ergodic theorem, which says
 all dynamical systems can be split into dissipative and conservative parts.
 With the dissipative part being the one that wanders away.
 Roughly speaking, the conservative part is the strongly–connected part
 of the graph, and the dissipative parts are upstream of this sink.
 So this is curious serendipity or synchronicity that I'm working on one
 thing last night, and totally by accident I trip over something that informs.
 Interesting.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But I digress.
 The point here is I now have a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Thermalization Conjecture
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that resolves special–relativistic time dilation effects.
 My twin can go off on a fast rocket ship and experience time-dilation effects,
 and return seconds or minutes younger.
 We both experience 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

here and now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 each at our own pace, and when the twin rejoins me, our experience of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

here and now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 rejoins at the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

present moment
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 He does not arrive some seconds or minutes in the past or the future, he
 arrives in the present.
 The Thermalization Conjecture is that the reason for this is that his bundle
 of thermodynamic entanglement might go off in a rocket–ship, and experience
 special–relativisitic 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

proper time
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in the conventional way, but, upon returning, his blob of thermodynamic
 entanglement promptly entangles with my own, and we both live in the thermodyna
mic 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

present
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 That is, the proper time clocks get resynchronized into the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

present
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, this is an advance over where I was a few weeks ago, when these questions
 of proper time were befuddling.
 Now, at least I have a mechanism.
 Obvious and trite it may be, but it's something I can grasp hold of.
 And now, time for some thought–experiments.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, obviously, when my twin disembarks from his space–ship and we shake
 hands and we breath the same air, we are both clearly in the thermalized
 present.
 When did this happen? As his ship re–entered the atmosphere? What about
 radio communications? He flies off.
 I transmit a radio–message, in my current, here and now present.
 He is a few light–minutes away, and so receives that message in his present,
 here–and–now.
 Does that message cause a kind–of thermalization to happen? It is certainly
 a dribbling of information between two thermal blobs, experiencing distinct
 passage of proper time.
 The reception of the info does not alter the rate of progression of proper
 time, for either the sender or the receiver.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
That is, the here–and–now for both of us is the strongly–connected component
 of the graph of relationships between the atoms in our bodies.
 Every atom involved in any chemical bond in my body is exchanging photons
 – virtual photons, every femtosecond, back–and–forth.
 In that sense, every chemical bond can be understood as a graph–theoretic
 strong graph between the two atoms in that bond.
 By similar arguments, the atoms in a thermally mixed gas are also in a
 graph–theoretic strong component.
 Relativistic proper time is experienced by this strongly–connected component,
 as a whole.
 That is, thermalization synchronizes clocks.
 Sure, of course, when we look at a muon whizzing around an accelerator,
 we can compute the rate at which it's proper time advances, and this computatio
n is not wrong.
 But that muon is causally disconnected from our own here–and–now.
 Yes, it experiences the bending forces of the accelerator magnets, that
 keep it going in a circle.
 But those virtual photons are not...uhh, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

thermal
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 And this highlights a vocabulary problem.
 We say that the virtual photons in a magnetic field are 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

deep infrared
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, because they have very long wavelength.
 But they are not thermally infrared: magnetic fields are not thermal at
 the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

microscopic scale
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 The virtual photons of the magnetic field are phase–coherent.
 So that's another vocabulary issue: they are not 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

coherent
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 as in a laser 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

coherent state
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, or some eigenfunction of some ladder operator.
 At least ...
 not when I last looked.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Which brings us to another problem: the origin of a magnetic field.
 It is of course, the flow of electrons in a wire.
 Those electrons necessarily move thermally.
 The magnetic field is necessarily a thermal average of the individual electric
 fields of each electron, relative to the lab frame.
 So, in this sense, the magnetic field is necessarily a thermal average,
 and if it were possible to measure, then we'd measure some finite mean–square
 variation in the magnetic field strength.
 That presumably will correlate 100% with the thermal environment of the
 electrons in the wire, including temperature.
 And the muon experiences this bath.
 Red–shifted and blue–shifted as appropriate.
 This bath cause the muon to change direction of motion, per classical electrody
namics.
 It does not thermalize the proper time of the muon itself.
 That is, whatever dynamical process is running inside the muon that causes
 it to decay, that dynamical process is thermally isolated from the ambient
 magnetic field that the muon is passing through.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I guess.
 Perhaps there's some g–2 lesson in here, but I would not know how to compute
 that.
 Perhaps there is some miniscule thermal coupling.
 If there was, it would show as a violation of special relativity for the
 muon.
 I don't think we have experiments that are sensitive to this.
 So the proposed experiment here is to compare muon decay in 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

hot
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

cold
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 magnetic fields.
 The hot field would be generated by literally hot wires, so that the electrons
 in the wires have a large variation in velocity.
 The average magnetic field for both hot and cold would have to be the same,
 because we want the muon to take the same average mean path through the
 storage ring.
 Would the muon experience different decay rates between the hot and the
 cold magnetic fields? How bit of an effect would it be? I honestly do expect
 there to be some effect, because it is hard to imagine that the internal
 mechanism of muon decay is perfectly thermally isolated from the external
 world.
 However, I guess I can also argue that that it could be, in fact, almost
 perfectly thermally isolated.
 How? Well, For example, superconductivity is a mechanism that isolates,
 phase–transitions in such a way that the one phenomenon (conduction) is
 thermally isolated from another (the bulk material is not at absolute zero.)
 So we do have the mathematical apparatus that can perform thermal isolation
 between bulk material and some measurable field.
 And so perhaps the mechanism of muon decay is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

thermally isolated
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, in a similar fashion, from the bulk magnetic field that the muon is flying
 through.
 The result is that the proper time experienced by the muon decay mechanism
 really is exactly that of special relativity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All this is very highly speculative.
 No one knows what dynamical system describes muon decay, and certainly,
 I have never seen a treatment of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

hot
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

cold
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 magnetic fields.
 I imagine surely, someone else has thought about this before, but I haven
 not tripped over this.
 I've never looked out for it either, maybe it slid past, just out of sight.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Anyway, the astronaut on the rocket–ship: are they thermally isolated? Well,
 in practice, there is both some galactic magnetic field, and also the CMB,
 and finally, the radio transmissions they receive from home.
 The number of states in the bulk astronaut is two–power–of–Avogadro's number;
 the entropy is log of that, so the bulk entropy of the astronaut is order
 of Avogadro's number.
 The entropy of the radio signals is maybe hundreds, maybe millions, maybe
 billions.
 Maybe terahertz–trillions.
 But this is still bazillions of orders of magnitude smaller than the bulk
 entropy of the astronaut, and thus is not enough to thermalize them in
 such a way to manifest as a change to proper time experience of here–and–now.
 Presumably the same is true for the CMB.
 I am too lazy to perform the calculation, but if I recall correctly, there
 are maybe one hundred CMB photons per cubic meter, which is absurdly tiny
 compared to the entropy of the bulk astronaut.
 So lets recap that: my Thermalization Conjecture states that the experience
 of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is in fact the experience of the thermal bulk.
 This conjecture then implies that *if* there were an Avogadro's number
 of thermal photons per cubic meter in the CMB, then those photons would
 thermalize the astronaut, and impact the perception of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 But since there aren't that many photons, it does not happen.
 And also, if there were that many photons, the astronaut would be cooked
 to a crisp.
 Or rather, vaporized into a plasma.
 Or rather, the universe would not be transparent, anyway.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ah hah! Yay! So my thermalization conjecture, uhh, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

explains
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 the CMB, then! Or rather, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

explains
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 why the CMB provides a global rest–frame for the universe.
 So, before the last photon decoupling, the universe was (electromagnetically)
 thermalized (the neurtrinos had decoupled earlier.) This means that the
 universe experiences a synchronized bulk single–proper–time.
 That is, proper time passes at the same rate everywhere in the universe,
 because all charged particles are part of the strongly connected graph.
 When the photons decouple, this leaves behind the CMB, and of course this
 has to be isotropic (up to BAO, etc.) and of course it provides a unique
 space–like surface that provides a rest–frame.
 This rest frame is the last time that proper time was globally synchronized
 across the universe.
 This is exactly where that rest–frame comes from.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Wow! OK! So this is real forward progress! I mean, its still trite and silly,
 but its ...
 more than I had before.
 I still don't understand the mechanical details of how here–and–now resynchroni
ze for the astronaut and his twin, when they reunite.
 But the answer does seem to be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

its thermal
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 OK, so I think I can retire that, or put that on the back burner.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
On the front burner is this: The past seems to detach from the present and
 freeze into place, because the combinatoric entanglements of the past exceed
 some threshold, so that the present can no longer undo those entanglements.
 That is, thermalized systems necessarily leave behind an unalterable past.
 This implies that there is some order parameter that splits past from present.
 At the start of today's diary entry, I suggested that this might be because
 Planck's constant and Avogadro's number are incomparable.
 Is this bullshit, or is this meaningful? Well ...
 I'm intellectually spent, for the moment, and I need to go ride a bike.
 So not gonna do this now.
 Later, dude.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
3 May 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I'm thinking of the system as a phase transition.
 The past is frozen, the present is fluid.
 The present proceeds forward in time.
 So how do I construct this model? First, this model does not make sense
 for classical mechanics in a Newtonian background.
 By definition, physics is defined to have time as a parameter; it marches
 forward, it doesn't go backwards.
 Yes, so wave equations have both advanced and retarded solutions but the
 advanced solutions are dismissed out of hand, as they are backwards–going.
 Which makes sense for water waves.
 And microscopic waves aren't classical.
 Same remarks apply for a relativistic background, where proper time in
 the lab frame moves forward by definition.
 Same even for ordinary QM.
 Need to employ TSVF - two state–vector formalism, to get backwards–moving
 states.
 The challenge is then to write a many–body quantum system using TVSF.
 I suppose the right answer is to try to mash it up with full QED in some
 way.
 Acknowledging that there are field operators, but avoiding loop diagrams.
 Do everything at the tree level.
 Flat space is enough.
 Don't need GR.
 Don't need weak or strong interactions.
 Nuclei can be point particles.
 Just tree–level QED, with explicit TVSF so as to handle interferometric
 interactions.
 That is, to handle Bell states.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And then I get stuck.
 The gut instinct is to treat QM as TIQM - transactional interpretation
 of QM, so that backwards–moving states get used to resolve measurements.
 This of course doesn't work out in the naive way, I've noted this before.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But anyway, the point is that ergodicity/thermalization is not enough, because,
 e.g.
 for a classical atomic gas, there's no 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

width
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 to time, there's no wave–front.
 No backwards–moving influences.
 Sure, some atom thermalizes after a dozen collisions – moving forwards
 in time.
 So what.
 This is just how time is axiomatized in Newtonian systems.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So we have two distinct problems, but they are the same ones as ever: How
 does one describe quantum thermalization (in some TSVF formalism, or tree–level
 QED) and how does one resolve many–world back down to one world? The only
 answer right now is for me to read what others have done.
 But whatever.
 The point was to note that thermalization alone in a classical regime is
 not enough.
 The tree–level interactions are needed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The following Wikipedia article has some inspirational content:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tensor_network This inspiration is that ...
 well ...
 something.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
There's also ...
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Viscosity_solution 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
5 May 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Sp a week or two ago I wrote in this diary that I was confused about many–worlds
 and a transactional interpretation.
 Last night I was thinking: there should be no confusion: influences move
 backwards in time, cause states to collapse there, and then move forward
 in time, to the other interferometer arm.
 I'm even thinking now that the interferometer does NOT need to be closed!
 i.e.
 the two arms don't need to be brought together to force collapse.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, for example, a singlet state is prepared at 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{0},x_{0}\right)$
\end_inset

 out of two half–spins, and these fly off to be measured at 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{1},x_{1}\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{2},x_{2}\right)$
\end_inset

 (which can be space–like separated, so as to underline the non–local natures
 of the measurement.
 ) The point of using the TSVF formalism is that the measurement at 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{1},x_{1}\right)$
\end_inset

 propagates backwards in time to 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{0},x_{0}\right)$
\end_inset

 bounces there, maybe causing a partial collapse there, and then travels
 back up to 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{2},x_{2}\right)$
\end_inset

 causing a collapse there.
 That is, not only are the spins entangled, but the collapses are entangled.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I am envisioning the w.f.
 collapse as being an avalanche at a critical point, analogous to Per Bak's
 critical sandpiles.
 Except that in this case, it is not sand–grains but a network of photon–electro
n interactions, at the tree–level in QED.
 The spin at 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{1},x_{1}\right)$
\end_inset

 is coupled to 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{2},x_{2}\right)$
\end_inset

 and as avalanching starts at 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{1},x_{1}\right)$
\end_inset

 it also starts at 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{2},x_{2}\right)$
\end_inset

 and proceeds in both locations in a coupled fashion: each back–reacts on
 the other.
 Observe that both 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{1},x_{1}\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{2},x_{2}\right)$
\end_inset

 are a part of here–and–now and still in the fluid state, not yet frozen
 in time.
 The completion of the avalanche is part of what freezes them.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Even though locations may get frozen in the past, they can still act as
 conductors of spin information, i.e.
 act as conductors of qubits.
 Thus, the point 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{0},x_{0}\right)$
\end_inset

 where the singlet was prepared is at the trailing end of here–and–now,
 with almost all aspects frozen into the past, but a small channel remaining
 open, to allow qubit info to fly in between 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{1},x_{1}\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{2},x_{2}\right)$
\end_inset

, passing through 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{0},x_{0}\right)$
\end_inset

 as the avalanche occurs.
 That is, the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

classical structure
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 (whatever that is) surrounding 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{0},x_{0}\right)$
\end_inset

 is frozen into the past, but the qubit channel remains open.
 Which it has to, because of the no–cloning/no–erasure theorem: the no–cloing
 theorem is a statement that the singlet–entangled qubit channel located
 at 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(t_{0},x_{0}\right)$
\end_inset

 must remain open, and cannot be frozen into the past.
 As long as qubits flow, they must be able to flow through there.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So this sketch is now concrete enough that perhaps it is open to theoretical
 modeling.
 Lets see if we can make this so:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Create a random network, i.e.
 a graph of vertexes and edges.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Place entangled spin states at the vertexes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Each edge is a spin-1/2 propagator.
 For the model, this is just the trivial propagator: we just copy, or rather,
 mark as identical the two spins at either vertex at the end of the edge.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Embed the graph into Minkowski spacetime, such that all edges are time–like.
 (or maybe null?)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Pick a vertex that has no future edges: i.e.
 has no edge that connects to a vertex that is to it's future.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
At the selected vertex, twiddle aka 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

measure
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 the spin.
 Since this spin is entangled, this should propagate through the network,
 causing other qubits to correlate.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I imagine there are dozens, if not hundreds of papers describing exactly
 this.
 This is part–and–parcel of the central core of quantum computing.
 But I don't know these papers, I have not read them.
 I do recall a key–word: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

clock states
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, which carry no information, as opposed to some other kind of state, that
 does.
 I need to search–engine this and read about it.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Anyway, part of the exploration of the above network model is to look for
 avalanching behavior.
 The quantum computing people treat this as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

noise
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and they want to get rid of it.
 I want to go in the opposite direction: to discover that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

noise
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and thermalization happen automatically, as the result of avalanching.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This makes it different from, say, Brownian motion.
 So in 1905, Einstein looks at Brownian motion, and obtains expressions
 for diffusion.
 His calculation is a certain kind of ensemble–average calculation.
 Here, we kind of know that ensemble–averaging 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

cannot work
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, because the no–cloning theorem blocks it.
 So we need a different mechanism, and that mechanism has to be avalanching
 through wave–function phases.
 Small disturbances have to be amplified into large re–arrangements.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let me change the topic slightly.
 So I'm reading about Brownian motion on Wikipedia, and I was staring at
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kirchhoff%27s_theorem which is about graph
 Laplacians, and this pops out at me: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
...the Laplacian L can be factored into the product of the incidence matrix
 and its transpose, ...
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and two things pop into my mind: First, the smooth–space Laplacian is the
 infinite–dimensional version of this in that the (transpose of the) incidence
 matrix is the gradient, an the incidence matrix itself is the divergence,
 so div dot grad is the Laplacian.
 But I've never seen a first–principles derivation of that limit.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How would that work? The graph–network connectivity of Euclidean space is
 kind–of–ish infininte–dimensional, in that the continuum is uncountable.
 The Laplacian is not 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

just
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 the limit of the graph laplacian for an 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

infinitely small grid
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, but is also rotationally invariant, and so ...
 Ugh.
 Some mashup of Cantor sets and Grassman variables and tensor algebras.
 The analogies are all there, the groundwork is laid, the proper, formal
 treatment of the limit has not been taken.
 But also, hand in hand with this is the Dirac equation: it's also kind
 of like the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
product of the incidence matrix and its transpose
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 
\emph default
but going off into the Weyl spinors that can be built from the Clifford
 algebra on the tangent space.
 That is, the the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

incidence matrix
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is a map between a manifold and it's tangent space, the divergence goes
 in the opposite direction (using the manifold metric for the dot product)
 and so the usual Laplacian is build from the contraction of the two, given
 a scalar.
 But one can also build Weyl spinors from the tangent bundle, and contracting
 those gives the Dirac eqn.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Perhaps the first step is to try to explain how an incidence matrix is just
 like a map between a manifold and it's tangent space.
 Having established that analogy, lets now construct a Clifford algebra
 from the graph edges.
 Which is fun, because we can now use the notation 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

e
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 for both an edge, and a basis vector.
 Heh.
 And thence, from this Clifford algebra, we construct the graph analog of
 Weyl spinors, and then, from these, the graph analog of the Dirac equation.
 Again, I suppose someone has done this already.
 Who? Would search engines know? Would grok know? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I was also going to blurble about relationships between:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cauchy%E2%80%93Binet_formula
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riemann_mapping_theorem
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jordan_curve_theorem
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Viscosity_solution
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schramm%E2%80%93Loewner_evolution
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hey, I am now reading this: Methodical banality Hannah Katznelson https://aeon.co
/essays/who-needs-ai-text-generation-when-theres-erasmus-of-rotterdam and
 the wires in my head cross over: LLM's generate based on context, but this
 is just approximate.
 This crosses with the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

viscosity solution
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, above: the stuff LLM's generate is close to intended reality, but they
 file off the sharp edges that are really there in real reality.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Again, my brain is a mashup machine: whatever I read, that is what I think
 about: I can read about Erasmus and commonplace books and eclectic writing,
 but burbling in the back of my mind is a matrix all of whose eigenvalues
 are all negative.
 Push, push, push to get a closer and closer approximation to ..
 past reality.
 And that is what the LLM's will give us: a closer approximation to the
 frozen past.
 But we live in the present, here and now, not the past.
 Hmm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
The End
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is the end of Part Ten–D of the diary.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
