#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\listings_params "basicstyle={\ttfamily},basewidth={0.45em}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Language Learning Diary - Part Eight
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
Sept 2022 - present
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepštas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
The language-learning effort involves research and software development
 to implement the ideas concerning unsupervised learning of grammar, syntax
 and semantics from corpora.
 This document contains supplementary notes and a loosely-organized semi-chronol
ogical diary of results.
 The notes here might not always makes sense; they are a short-hand for
 my own benefit, rather than aimed at you, dear reader!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Part Eight of the diary is a collection of notes from the literature, collected
 here as a handy reference (because adequate articles on some of these ideas
 do not yet exist).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Summary Conclusions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A summary of what is found in this part of the diary:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
No summary yet.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Mapping Paramters to Bipolar Hypervectors
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A bipolar hypervector is a vector in a 
\begin_inset Formula $D$
\end_inset

-dimensional space having values in the set 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{Z}_{2}=\left\{ -1,1\right\} $
\end_inset

; that is, a vector in 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\{ -1,1\right\} ^{D}.$
\end_inset

 Bipolar hypervectors have the interestng property that, for 
\begin_inset Formula $D$
\end_inset

 even, given any (random) vector 
\begin_inset Formula $v$
\end_inset

, if one flips half the bits to get a vector 
\begin_inset Formula $w$
\end_inset

, then 
\begin_inset Formula $v$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $w$
\end_inset

 are orthogonal!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This interesting property can be used to map point sequences (
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

curves
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

) to sequences of bipolar hypervectors such that the endpoints of the point
 sequence are orthogonal, and intermediate points have increasingly larger
 cosine distances.
 That is, there is a homomorphism of point sequences to hypervectors that
 preserves the metric on the point sequence.
 This metric property can then be deployed to simplify classification problems,
 by mapping the space to be classified to vector arithmetic and cosine distances.
 This proceeds as follows.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\{ p_{1},\cdots,p_{n}\right\} $
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
The End
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is the end of Part Eight of the diary.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
