#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\listings_params "basicstyle={\ttfamily},basewidth={0.45em}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Language Learning Diary - Part Three
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
Sept 2021-present
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
The language-learning effort involves research and software development
 to implement the ideas concerning unsupervised learning of grammar, syntax
 and semantics from corpora.
 This document contains supplementary notes and a loosely-organized semi-chronol
ogical diary of results.
 The notes here might not always makes sense; they are a short-hand for
 my own benefit, rather than aimed at you, dear reader!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Part three of the diary on the language-learning effort continues work on
 the English dataset.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
September 2021
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
After the previous setback with grammatical clustering, it seems like more
 exploratory work is in order.
 Part of the exploratory effort is to discover faster ways of finding similar
 words, and to find algorithms that can do incremental or continuous learning.
 Some questions along this path:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
What is the distribution of disjuncts? (Yes, we've done this before, but
 lets do it again for the latest 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

clean
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 dataset.) Create a graph showing rank vs number of times a disjunct has
 been observed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
How are disjuncts shared? Create a graph showing the rank vs.
 the number of words that share this disjunct.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Expt-4 Sept 2021
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The above questions are being aimed at `run-1-en_mpg-tranche-123.rdb`, as
 described earlier in the diary.
 Two versions will be explored: the full dataset, and a lightly trimmed
 dataset.
 These are summarized below.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The trimming process is funny: trimming is not idempotent.
 Basically, the linkage filter, which guarantees that connectors have correspond
ing word entries, knocks out disjuncts and so pushes words below the cut-off.
 Repeating this process then knocks out more connectors.
 It needs to be run until its stable.
 This is CPU consuming.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
The End
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is the end of the diary.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
