#LyX 2.4 created this file. For more info see https://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 620
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children no
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding auto
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_roman_osf false
\font_sans_osf false
\font_typewriter_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_formatted_ref 0
\use_minted 0
\use_lineno 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tablestyle default
\listings_params "basicstyle={\ttfamily},basewidth={0.45em}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\change_bars false
\postpone_fragile_content false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\docbook_table_output 0
\docbook_mathml_prefix 1
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Diary – Part Ten–G
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
March 2026 – present
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepštas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Unlike parts one through nine in this series,
 this one is not really about the language–learning effort.
 It is instead a private diary;
 a continuation of Part Ten–F,
 which got over–long.
 It is not curated for human consumption;
 I am making the assumption that no human being will ever actually read this.
 Thus,
 it is filled with random stuff I feel like writing.
 Some of it is very personal,
 some of it is nonsense.
 Mostly,
 I am finding that the act of writing helps otherwise vague and scattered thoughts quantum–collapse into a more coherent form,
 where I can examine them,
 like a dead butterfly pinned down in a display case.
 Dead words.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
If you are interested in this content,
 then you should ask an AI agent to read it,
 then pretended that it's me,
 then ask about it.
 I believe that present–day LLM technology is sufficiently advanced to be able to do this.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Part Ten already got an introduction.
 A different way of thinking is about what is going on here is that this is a form of life–logging.
 Or,
 in 18th century terms,
 a diary.
 Just not anywhere near as compelling as those written by the famous diarists.
 This one is more of a mental self–portrait.
 And not even for you but for myself.
 Not to cast a narcissistic gaze at my own words,
 but to organize my own thoughts.
 Still in the experimental stage.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
20 March 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Reading deeper into chapter 12,
 there's lots of confirmation that canonical quantization is being done on a space–like surface.
 I'll copy a few formulas here,
 as they're food for thought.
 Actually,
 they're giggle–worthy.
 This is basic,
 remedial stuff,
 but I'm getting a giggle out of it.
 It's the Klein–Gordon,
 I will copy more than needed,
 so as to sign–convention it.
 So its 
\begin_inset Formula $+---$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\square+m^{2}\right)\phi=0$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{L}=\frac{1}{2}\left(\left(\partial_{\mu}\phi\right)^{2}-m^{2}\phi^{2}\right)$
\end_inset

 and here's where I start giggling.
 The conjugate momentum is
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\pi=\frac{\delta\mathcal{L}}{\delta\dot{\phi}}=\dot{\phi}
\]

\end_inset

and of course 
\begin_inset Formula $\left[\phi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right),\pi\left(\mathbf{x}^{\prime},t\right)\right]=i\delta^{3}\left(\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{x}^{\prime}\right)$
\end_inset

 and then the Hamiltonian is the Lagrange xform :
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
P^{0} & =H=\int d^{3}x\mathcal{\mathcal{H}}\left(\pi,\phi\right)\\
\mathcal{\mathcal{H}}\left(\pi,\phi\right) & =\pi\dot{\phi}-\mathcal{L}=\frac{1}{2}\left[\pi^{2}+\left|\nabla\phi\right|^{2}+m^{2}\phi^{2}\right]
\end{align*}

\end_inset

Notable here is a short day–dream about geometry.
 Bjorken&Drell write the above point–wise,
 by including the base–point 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

 as an argument to each of the field operators..
 This encourages the reader to think of a space–time manifold (here,
 Minkowski space) as a base space,
 and the fields as a section of a bundle above this base space.
 What is this bundle,
 exactly?
 Well,
 its made of several parts.
 One would be to demonstrate the Lorentz covariance of internal symmetries.
 For Klein–Gordon,
 its a scalar,
 so there's nothing.
 A different part is to have these operators as sections of a bundle,
 where each fiber is a Weyl algebra.
 I'm drawing attention to this,
 because the standard presentation,
 in B&D and other texts of that era,
 is that these are just 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

operators
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 devoid of any setting.
 They just 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

are
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 and its up to you to imagine or guess what else might be an operator,
 or where they come from.
 They're just instances from some unspecified set.
 For me,
 my brain always bonked,
 here.
 There's some 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

set of operators
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 but what is it?
 What's that set?
 B&D never say,
 no one else does either.
 Hint,
 perhaps,
 but never say.
 So,
 for me,
 it was this vague itch – well,
 more than vague,
 it sometimes became so intense that it prevented my ability to understand.
 I recall tripping over 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

operator algebras
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 but was stymied by not knowing the formal definition of an algebra;
 more,
 by not knowing that I didn't know,
 and the formal definition,
 simple as it is,
 is fundamentally important for knowing what an 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

algebra
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is.
 I mean,
 duh,
 but that's what it is.
 I also didn't really know what an operator was.
 I mean,
 of course,
 linear,
 and of course,
 infinite–dimensional,
 but I was lacking in any formal grounding in operator theory.
 Both of these deficits have been cured.
 Many decades far too late,
 bu it is what it is.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(XXX The fiber idea is just plain wrong,
 see 29 Feb diary for explanation.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Three things were needed to find the cure.
 (1) spare time.
 I had to hit the stacks at the UT PMA library and read books at random,
 irrespective of topic.
 This gave a marvelous survey,
 which I'd been sorely lacking.
 If I had had that survey earlier,
 oh,
 how things would have been different.
 (2) Wikipedia.
 Without this,
 its again 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

impossible
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Of course,
 if one had a question,
 one could wander into the book stacks and try to find the answer.
 But it would be on page 155 of a book in aisle G on the lower middle shelf on the left.
 It was needle–in–a–haystack search.
 More than half the time,
 one would come up empty–handed.
 I have no clue how the geniuses of the earlier eras did their stuff.
 Were they omnivorous readers?
 For me,
 the ability to click a link,
 and get an answer,
 or at least a partial answer,
 or even just a clue,
 hint,
 pointer,
 that was a fundamental breakthrough.
 I mean,
 for crying out loud,
 I could read the formal definition for an 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

algebra
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 without having had to stumble through the library,
 perusing some textbook,
 to find it.
 (3) Online PDF's.
 Anyway,
 so now I'm cured.
 Ingredient (4) has recently shown:
 the LLM's.
 These are...
 tools to improve the speed of knowledge acquisition:
 industrial sieves separating what is wanted from the dross.
 Panning for gold,
 but using an industrial apparatus for panning.
 A conveyor belt of knowledge,
 offering delivery–on–demand.
 I'm still learning how to use them.
 But still.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So where were we?
 We have operators 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi$
\end_inset

 and we can write points 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

 and by convention,
 the base–space is Minkowski space 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

 and the operators are fibers.
 Is it possible to flip the bundle on its side,
 and say that the operator algebra for 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi$
\end_inset

 are the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

base space
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and the fibers are 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

?
 OMG.
 Well,
 this is very much the path I've been attempting to take,
 with mixed success.
 I need to throw away a lot of useless mental baggage.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So one piece of useless baggage is this.
 In a conventional fiber bundle,
 the base space is distinguished:
 it carries a topology,
 and a section is a function into the fibers.
 Flipping it on it's side is tricky:
 if one mentally imagines a *single* fiber 
\begin_inset Formula $F$
\end_inset

,
 then there is no map (no function) from a single point 
\begin_inset Formula $p\in F$
\end_inset

 to all of the points 
\begin_inset Formula $x\in B$
\end_inset

 of the base–space 
\begin_inset Formula $B$
\end_inset

 where the fiber might be valued as 
\begin_inset Formula $p$
\end_inset

.
 Its just not a function,
 and there's no way to cure this,
 at least,
 if one thinks of a *single* fiber.
 Yes,
 locally,
 a fiber bundle looks like the Cartesian product 
\begin_inset Formula $B\times F$
\end_inset

,
 but the gluing of the fibers makes use of the topology on 
\begin_inset Formula $B$
\end_inset

 and not on 
\begin_inset Formula $F$
\end_inset

.
 The space 
\begin_inset Formula $B$
\end_inset

 is distinguished.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So how do I turn 
\begin_inset Formula $E=B\times F$
\end_inset

 on its side?
 Well,
 for starters,
 the fundamental objects need to be the sections 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi$
\end_inset

 and not the points 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

.
 And the sections need to be space–like,
 I guess,
 so I want to write 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi\left(t\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi\left(t\right)$
\end_inset

 retaining a time coordinate but having the space coordinate be implicit.
 All this drives to the Hamiltonian picture.
 Next,
 if this is actually,
 really,
 truly an operator–valued fiber bundle,
 then I have to ask what the horizontal and vertical subspaces are,
 and what the connection is.
 This has to be a connection on an inf–dimensional fiber,
 and the fiber is explicitly the Weyl algebra.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The rest of B&D chapter 12 seems to provide most of what is needed to articulate the above.
 I will copy large tracts of chapter 12 down below,
 because it's honestly interesting,
 and it provides a one–stop–shop were I to ever return here.
 But before I do this,
 a few more comments.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The B&D development has space–time be Minkowski space.
 It's not dynamical.
 It's barely even kinematic.
 It leaves some kinematic traces on the proceedings,
 in the form of 
\begin_inset Formula $P_{\mu}$
\end_inset

 the momentum *operator* and 
\begin_inset Formula $M_{\mu\nu}$
\end_inset

 the angular momentum *operator*.
 This does not change,
 if I replace Minkowski space by e.g.
 Schwarzschild or de Sitter:
 neither of these spaces are dynamical.
 They have a fixed metric,
 we know exactly what that metric is,
 everywhere,
 in whatever coordinate chart we might like to work in.
 Yes,
 I rather like the Painleve coordinates,
 but this is besides the point;
 the topology of the base space 
\begin_inset Formula $B$
\end_inset

 is fixed,
 it is not dynamical.
 Its nailed down.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So Wikipedia has this fun sentence,
 to the effect that Riemannian manifolds are rigid,
 fixed by the metric,
 while symplectic manifolds are floppy,
 with the 
\begin_inset Formula $MJM^{T}=J$
\end_inset

 symplectic condition constraining very little.
 In my conception of here–and–now,
 it would appear that the floppiness of the symplectic manifold represents an intermediate condition,
 bridging between the unknown future and the rigid past.
 The special points of Morse theory,
 Floer theory being,
 I dunno:
 the points specifically where 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

free will
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 becomes manifest.
 Or something like that.
 But that's like dreaming of Mt.
 Everest while standing at the foothills of Beverly Ridge.
 And I'm in Beverly,
 and the weather is beautiful,
 and I'm going for a walk,
 and the rest of B&D chapter 12 will have to wait.
 I need to figure out a way of making the base–space of this bundle acquire some sort of dynamical nature.
 The problem is,
 of course,
 that the conventional development of fiber bundles is entirely free of any dynamical language.
 And perhaps someone has worked on this,
 but I don't know,
 and have not stumbled over this.
 And perhaps my LLM's might know.
 But I have to go for a walk now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Later,
 after dinner
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(XXX The fiber/sheaf/section idea is just plain wrong,
 see 29 Feb diary for explanation.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let's try this:
 a sheaf of space–like surfaces.
 No metric.
 The tangent spaces have to be Minkowski spaces.
 We know spacetime is 1+3–dimensional to hundreds of TeV if not millions or whatever.
 Planck.
 Now,
 supplement this with a cotangent bundle.
 Not sure how;
 I want to have a sheaf of surfaces,
 but its not clear how define a cotangent to something that isn't quite a manifold.
 Well,
 I guess we can have the sheaf sections be manifolds (i.e.
 with an atlas,
 that coordinatize the sections) but somehow avoid specifying any metric.
 The goal is to have some sheaf of symplectic manifolds.
 Or maybe some sheaf of jet bundles?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Why?
 I don't know.
 Lets look at the choices.
 One would be to tensor–product this with a scalar field.
 Given the absence of scalar fields in nature,
 perhaps should bite the bullet and tensor with a U(1) bundle.
 Perhaps even Kaluza–Klein the mess,
 but do it without a metric.
 Just co–tangent spaces ...
 again,
 maybe some sheaf of KK jet–bundles.
 If there were to be a metric,
 then this would allow a finite–dimensional Clifford algebra from which spinors and specifically Dirac spinors could be built.
 If this could be crossed into the Weyl algebra,
 well,
 then we'd get the QFT of the Dirac field;
 but I want to got just a bit farther,
 and twist it into the Weyl algebra of the sheaf of space–like sections.
 The goal is to evade the watchamacallit theorem;
 the spinor deformations look supersymmetric.
 Basically,
 somehow repeat the conventional 1001 lessons in supersymmetry,
 but do it with Clifford algebras instead of alternating algebras.
 This is the word–salad of ingredients.
 The trick is to convert the ingredients into ...
 something workable.
 Like any good cookbook with fancy recipes,
 there's going to be lots of prep work.
 So lets return to the B&D scalar field.
 Again,
 I'm just copying whole–sale the contents of chapter 12.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The 3D part of the momentum operator is
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathbf{P}=\int d^{3}x\,\pi\nabla\phi
\]

\end_inset

and 
\begin_inset Formula $P^{0}$
\end_inset

 was given before,
 and notice that it is not at all obvious that the combined 
\begin_inset Formula $P^{\mu}$
\end_inset

 transforms appropriately under Lorentz,
 given how different these two look.
 Curiously,
 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
i\left[P^{\mu},\phi\right]=\partial^{\mu}\phi
\]

\end_inset

is an operator identity.
 Holding on sections of the operator bundle over flat spacetime.
 My struggle here is that B&D is a textbook from 1964,
 so over 60 years old.
 Of course,
 there has been a mathematical formalization,
 some operator algebra,
 that uses the proper fiber–bundle language to talk about this algebra ...
 but I don't know what that is.
 I may have seen it once,
 but my eyes glazed over because I did not see the point.
 Now I see the point,
 but alas...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What is this?
 
\begin_inset Formula $P^{\mu}$
\end_inset

 is an integral over a space–like surface,
 somehow appropriately regularized in some kind of compactly–generated topology of some kind.
 Details unclear,
 but the point is that its an 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

single
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 operator,
 with no spatial location.
 It's constructed from *sections* 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi$
\end_inset

 and B&D use the convention of attaching 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

 to serve as a reminder that these are sections.
 The products 
\begin_inset Formula $P^{\mu}\phi$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi P^{\mu}$
\end_inset

 are operator products,
 taken point–wise at each 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

 of the section.
 We still have not given any precise definition of what the word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

operator
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 means,
 here.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What is 
\begin_inset Formula $\partial^{\mu}\phi$
\end_inset

?
 Its the horizontal part of the connection.
 We do not yet know what the vertical part needs to be.
 I've been imagining the fibers are each a copy of the Weyl algebra.
 I guess.
 So the vertical part of the connection needs to be fiber–valued.
 The words come out,
 but the details remain unclear.
 So lets get a better look at the fibers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I dunno.
 I have a mental block,
 for some reason.
 Maybe if I write some more,
 the mental block will go away.
 For a single,
 scalar Klein–Gordon field,
 we start by building a fiber that is 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}^{2}$
\end_inset

,
 so that we build a plane bundle over each 3-D point of a space–like surface.
 We endow the plane with a symplectic form 
\begin_inset Formula $J$
\end_inset

 given by 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
J=\left[\begin{array}{cc}
0 & 1\\
-1 & 0
\end{array}\right]
\]

\end_inset

The canonical coords on the plane are 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(q,p\right)$
\end_inset

 but we have freedom to reparameterize with a symplectic transform 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

 obeying 
\begin_inset Formula $MJM^{T}=J$
\end_inset

 and for the two-d case,
 this is any real 2-D matrix 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

 with unit determinant viz 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
M=\left[\begin{array}{cc}
a & b\\
c & d
\end{array}\right]
\]

\end_inset

with 
\begin_inset Formula $ad-bc=1$
\end_inset

 that is 
\begin_inset Formula $M\in SL\left(2,\mathbb{R}\right)$
\end_inset

.
 And here the games begin:
 it factors via 
\begin_inset Formula $PSL\left(2,\mathbb{R}\right)=SL\left(2,\mathbb{R}\right)/\left\{ \pm I\right\} $
\end_inset

 and has a double–covering by the metaplectic group 
\begin_inset Formula $Mp_{2}\left(\mathbb{R}\right)$
\end_inset

.
 Andre Weil gives an infinite–dimensional representation of 
\begin_inset Formula $Mp_{2n}\left(\mathbb{R}\right)$
\end_inset

 ...
 later;
 not now.
 Lets set this aside.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We take 
\begin_inset Formula $V=\mathbb{R}^{2}$
\end_inset

 to be a 2D vector space,
 and construct the tensor algebra 
\begin_inset Formula $T\left(V\right)=T\left(\mathbb{R}^{2}\right)$
\end_inset

.
 The symplectic,
 uhh,
 matrix 
\begin_inset Formula $J$
\end_inset

 is used to define the ideal generated by 
\begin_inset Formula $w\otimes v-v\otimes w=w^{T}Jv$
\end_inset

 or more simply 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{1}\otimes e_{2}-e_{2}\otimes e_{1}=1$
\end_inset

 or perhaps 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{q}\otimes e_{p}-e_{p}\otimes e_{q}=1$
\end_inset

 so we generate the Clifford algebra 
\begin_inset Formula $T\left(\mathbb{R}^{2}\right)/\left(\left(e_{q}\otimes e_{p}-e_{p}\otimes e_{q}=1\right)\right)$
\end_inset

.
 This becomes the usual Weyl algebra upon identification of 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{q}\mapsto x$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{p}\mapsto d/dx$
\end_inset

 which then gets the conventional Weyl basis elements etc.
 from the PBW theorem.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To make contact with B&D,
 we have to do two things.
 First,
 write 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{q}\mapsto\phi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{p}\mapsto i\pi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

 where 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

 indicates that we are working at the specific fiber associated with the point 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

 in the base (which is a space–like surface).
 At this point,
 neither 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 nor 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi$
\end_inset

 are 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

operators
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

;
 they are merely 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

unit vectors
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 whose tensor products generate the PBW basis for the Weyl algebra.
 They only become 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

operators
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 when they are actually ...
 mapped to operators!
 The mapping 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{q}\mapsto x$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{p}\mapsto d/dx$
\end_inset

 is just one that is possible;
 there are others (Mumford Theta,
 Arens–Micheal,
 compact–generated,
 etc.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The second point of contact that needs to be taken is to write the Hamiltonian.
 To momentarily simplify the discussion,
 set the spatial derivative to zero:
 
\begin_inset Formula $\nabla\phi=0$
\end_inset

 and fix the point 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

 so we can talk about things on just one fiber.
 This gives the Hamiltonian
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathcal{H}\left(\pi,\phi\right)=\frac{1}{2}\left[\pi^{2}+m^{2}\phi^{2}\right]
\]

\end_inset

Now,
 *if* 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi$
\end_inset

 were real numbers,
 then the Hamiltonian flows would be counter–rotating circles,
 the only symplectic xforms leaving this invariant would be 2D rotations,
 and overall this can be identified as the simple harmonic oscillator.
 But 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi$
\end_inset

 are NOT real numbers,
 they are vectors,
 and the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

correct
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 notation for 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{H}$
\end_inset

 is 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathcal{H}\left(e_{p},e_{q}\right)=\frac{1}{2}\left[e_{p}\otimes e_{p}+m^{2}e_{q}\otimes e_{q}\right]
\]

\end_inset

This allows us to identify 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{H}$
\end_inset

 with an operator that acts on some appropriate function space with some appropriate topology on that space.
 That mapping would map the tensor product to whatever product is appropriate on that space.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
21 March 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here's the curiosity in the above.
 For the standard map 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{q}\mapsto x$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{p}\mapsto-i\hbar d/dx$
\end_inset

 and a target space of 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}\left(\mathbb{R}\right)$
\end_inset

,
 one finds that the spectrum of 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{H}$
\end_inset

 is discrete;
 its the usual harmonic oscillator spectrum.
 However,
 there are other maps for 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{q}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{p}$
\end_inset

 and other spaces for 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{H}$
\end_inset

 to act on,
 and not all of these will have a discrete spectrum.
 Does this matter?
 I'm finding this confusing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let's look at the evidence.
 Clearly,
 one wants to have a mapping where 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{q}\mapsto\phi$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 is interpreted as a field strength;
 i.e.
 it is what appears in couplings to other fields.
 For a scalar field 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 is real;
 for a charged scalar,
 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 is complex;
 etc for a vector field.
 But does anything depend on having 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 having the form of the Hermite polynomial(s)?
 This is not clear.
 A propagator needs to be constructed;
 the standard construction of a propagator requires a complete set of states.
 The construction does not require that these have to be the Hermites;
 any other complete set of states will do,
 as long as the resulting propagator is for a scalar,
 and that the measure on the scalar is uniform,
 viz has the standard uniform measure on 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}$
\end_inset

.
 What about coherent states?
 These are eigenstates of the annihilation operator,
 which is just 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{q}-ie_{p}$
\end_inset

.
 Hmm.
 Well,
 I guess that the situation is forced,
 where there has to be something interpretable as a field–strength,
 and that field–strength has to be intrepretable as a probability distribution on 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}$
\end_inset

,
 and this appears to force the use of 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}\left(\mathbb{R}\right)$
\end_inset

 as the appropriate space of of field strengths at a point 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

.
 But this now implies that there is a second fiber bundle:
 the one who's fiber is 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}\left(\mathbb{R}\right)$
\end_inset

,
 in addition to the operator–valued fiber of which 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi$
\end_inset

 are sections.
 So at least from here,
 the conventional interpretation appears to be inescapable;
 I see no loopholes.
 And yet...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There is one more confusion.
 The wave–function 
\begin_inset Formula $\left|\Phi\right\rangle $
\end_inset

 is a section of the second bundle;
 its value on a fiber is 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\langle \mathbf{x},t\right.\left|\Phi\right\rangle $
\end_inset

 but otherwise,
 as a section 
\begin_inset Formula $\left|\Phi\right\rangle $
\end_inset

 is location–less.
 The field strength at a point is 
\begin_inset Formula $\left|\left\langle \mathbf{x},t\right.\left|\Phi\right\rangle \right|^{2}=\left\langle \Phi\right|\left.\mathbf{x},t\right\rangle \left\langle \mathbf{x},t\right.\left|\Phi\right\rangle $
\end_inset

 and *this* is the quantity that must be real–valued.
 That is,
 we MUST have 
\begin_inset Formula $\left|\left\langle \mathbf{x},t\right.\left|\Phi\right\rangle \right|^{2}\in\mathbb{R}$
\end_inset

 and that THIS is the field–strength.
 So we opened up the loophole,
 again.
 We've removed the restriction that 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\langle \mathbf{x},t\right.\left|\Phi\right\rangle \in L^{2}\left(\mathbb{R}\right)$
\end_inset

 and it seems that we can instead have 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\langle \mathbf{x},t\right.\left|\Phi\right\rangle \in F$
\end_inset

 as long as the space 
\begin_inset Formula $F$
\end_inset

 has a real–valued norm.
 The norm has to be bilinear so that 
\begin_inset Formula $F$
\end_inset

 has to be a vector space,
 and we identify 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\langle \Phi\right|\left.\mathbf{x},t\right\rangle \in F^{*}$
\end_inset

 as belonging to the dual space.
 The space has to be complete ...
 by convention,
 it has to be a Hilbert space,
 but I am having an attack of the stupids,
 so I don't see why.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So why does this matter?
 If 
\begin_inset Formula $F=L^{2}\left(\mathbb{R}\right)$
\end_inset

 and if 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{q}\mapsto x$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{p}\mapsto-i\hbar d/dx$
\end_inset

 then we come to the inescapable conclusion that the spectrum has the form 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(n+\frac{1}{2}\right)\hbar\omega$
\end_inset

 and that the ground state 
\begin_inset Formula $\left|0\right\rangle $
\end_inset

 has energy 
\begin_inset Formula $\hbar\omega/2$
\end_inset

 and we run afoul if this is identified with the cosmological constant.
 However,
 I cannot see,
 for the life of me,
 why 
\begin_inset Formula $F=L^{2}\left(\mathbb{R}\right)$
\end_inset

;
 it could just be some other Hilbert space,
 or any other space with a real–valued norm and bilinear.
 I need to ask an LLM about this.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(Oh,
 but see the next days entry below;
 the 
\begin_inset Formula $1/2$
\end_inset

 comes not from the harmonic oscillator,
 but from the commutator 
\begin_inset Formula $\left[p,q\right]=1$
\end_inset

 and so the 
\begin_inset Formula $1/2$
\end_inset

 is unavoidable;
 its a feature of any representation.
 Oh.
 Whoops.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(XXX The fiber idea is just plain wrong,
 see 29 Feb diary for explanation.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let's continue.
 We want to get off of just one fiber,
 and deal with the general case 
\begin_inset Formula $\nabla\phi\ne0$
\end_inset

.
 Reading further into chapter 12 of Bjorken & Drell gives the conventional development for how to do this.
 I will copy the formulas as the seem relevant.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Write 
\begin_inset Formula $\omega_{k}=+\sqrt{\mathbf{k}^{2}+m^{2}}$
\end_inset

 with 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbf{k}^{2}$
\end_inset

 the 3-wavevector.
 The normalized plane–wave solutions to KG are
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
f_{k}\left(x\right)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{\left(2\pi\right)^{3}2\omega_{k}}}e^{-ik\cdot x}=\frac{1}{\sqrt{\left(2\pi\right)^{3}2\omega_{k}}}e^{i\mathbf{k}\cdot\mathbf{x}-i\omega_{k}t}=f_{k}\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)
\]

\end_inset

The notational convention here is that the bold–face 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbf{k}$
\end_inset

 is the 3D wavevector,
 and italic 
\begin_inset Formula $k$
\end_inset

 is the 4-vector.
 I'm being picky,
 so as to avoid unwanted confusions later in the game.
 The above are complex–valued functions;
 they are not operators,
 nor are they 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

states
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 These are orthonormal,
 in that
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\int d^{3}xf_{k}^{*}\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)\overleftrightarrow{i\partial_{0}}f_{k^{\prime}}\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)=\delta^{3}\left(k-k^{\prime}\right)
\]

\end_inset

where
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
a\overleftrightarrow{\partial_{0}}b=a\dot{b}-\dot{a}b
\]

\end_inset

This is an anti–symmetric bilinear form.
 It's required to cancel out the 
\begin_inset Formula $1/\sqrt{2\omega_{k}}$
\end_inset

 and the anti–symmetry is forced by the complex conjugate.
 The 
\begin_inset Formula $\sqrt{2\omega_{k}}$
\end_inset

 arises as a requirement that the volume element is Lorentz–invariant.
 The Lorentz–invariant particle number density is
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\rho=i\psi^{*}\overleftrightarrow{\partial_{0}}\psi
\]

\end_inset

which is the zeroth component of the Noether current corresponding to Lorentz invariance.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The point of belaboring this point is to determine the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

root cause
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 of the anti–symmetry:
 it is forced by the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

classical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 non–quantized structure of a harmonic map (albeit with mass) on a pseudo–riemannian space.
 The point here is that,
 although I've been doing a lot of blathering about symplectic forms,
 the origin of this anti–symmetry is not because we enforced some kind of symplectic condition from the outside;
 rather,
 it appeared all on it's own,
 unbidden,
 during the analysis of the Lorentz invariance of a scalar field.
 Perhaps the answer here is trite:
 to talk about harmnic functions,
 we must necessarily talk about first derivatives.
 And to talk about first derivatives,
 we must necessarily talk about cotangent bundles.
 And it is unavoidably the case that cotangent bundles are symplectic.
 This appears to be an unavoidable consequence of working with first derivatives.
 The looseness or floppiness or lack of rigidity of symplectic manifolds is then hardly a surprise,
 but rather the consequence of imposing some bare minimum of constraints,
 that bare minimum having mostly something to do with normalizability,
 or of having a scalar norm,
 and its hard to get more minimal than that.
 Well,
 projective spaces are projective precisely because they discard the notion of a norm.
 And one can argue that wave–functions are 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

effectively
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 residents of a projective space;
 the normalization is a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

convenience
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Hmm.
 So once again,
 I am confused.
 Is it possible to articulate a set of solutions that are naturally interpreted as residing in a projective space?
 This projective space would still need to be Lorentz invariant,
 would still employ derivatives,
 would still induce a Noether current,
 and would still have anti–symmetry arise 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

naturally
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 These are my words,
 and I'm sticking to them,
 but I still feel as if I'm missing something.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A generalized (classical,
 scalar) solution of KG,
 expanded in terms of this plane–wave basis is
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{equation}
\phi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)=\int d^{3}k\left[f_{k}\left(x\right)a\left(k\right)+f_{k}^{*}\left(x\right)a^{\dagger}\left(k\right)\right]\label{eq:basis}
\end{equation}

\end_inset

I use the word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

classical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 to denote that in the above,
 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 a complex–valued field,
 and 
\begin_inset Formula $a,a^{\dagger}$
\end_inset

 as complex–valued amplitudes.
 The expansion is in terms of plane–waves,
 for two or three reasons.
 Foremost,
 the plane–wave can be identified with a non–interacting particle of constant momentum,
 i.e.
 at rest in it's rest frame.
 Second,
 plane waves are easy to work with.
 Easier than wave packets or something else with compact support;
 the physics appears not depend on the mathematical formalities of defining an appropriate topology that is complete (and appropriately bounded) for the space of solutions of the KG operator.
 More precisely,
 there does not appear to be any physical experiment that could physically distinguish one topology from another.
 At least,
 not that I know of.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The third reason to use a plane–wave basis is because we are not working with particles–in–a–box;
 in such a case a different basis would be appropriate.
 Due to the magic of Fourier decompositions,
 some of the possible linear combinations are entirely wild,
 and are tamed only be requirements of smoothness,
 and/or of uniform convergence.
 For the present discussion,
 we can ignore these other wild bases;
 perhaps there will be a need to revisit this later.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The normalization for this case is that 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
1=\int d^{3}x\left|\phi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)\right|^{2}
\]

\end_inset

for a single–particle solution,
 and here,
 the need to interpret 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 as a complex–valued square–integrable function on 1+3 Minkowski space is indisputable.
 This is the context in which the adjective 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Hilbert
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is not only appropriate,
 but is pointless to challenge.
 At the classical level,
 we're dealing only with complex–valued solutions to Klein–Gordon,
 and I don't see any particular need to get all twisted up over this.
 I mean,
 we could get fancy and perhaps insist on using some Sobolev space,
 if we wanted to do analysis on some general Riemannian manifold,
 but there does not appear to be any call for this,
 not at this stage of the game.
 At any rate,
 it again appears to be out–of–bounds for physics,
 as one would have to be mighty clever to invent some experiment to confirm or rule out that Sobolev spaces apply,
 or that the topology is compactly generated or not.
 These are desirable mathematical properties;
 they are not obviously experimentally accessible.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The plane–wave basis expansion of eqn 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "eq:basis"
plural "false"
caps "false"
noprefix "false"
nolink "false"

\end_inset

 can also be taken to be an operator eqn.
 that provides the definition of the creation and annihilation operators.
 It is convenient to perform the inversion while still working with complex–valued functions;
 the inversion gives
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
a\left(k\right)=\int d^{3}xf_{k}^{*}\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)\overleftrightarrow{i\partial_{0}}\phi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)
\]

\end_inset

which is B&D eqn 12.9,
 which is followed by a remark that the LHS is independent of time.
 The operator identity is obtained by means of the symbolic mapping 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi\mapsto e_{q}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{\phi}=\pi\mapsto e_{p}$
\end_inset

.
 This mapping is done fiber by fiber,
 so
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
a\left(k\right) & =i\int d^{3}xf_{k}^{*}\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)\left[e_{p}\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)-i\omega_{k}e_{q}\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)\right]\\
 & =ie_{p}\left(k\right)+\omega_{k}e_{q}\left(k\right)
\end{align*}

\end_inset

I'm confused about whether there needs to be some kind of gauge freedom for each fiber.
 After all,
 it seems that I have complete freedom to choose the 
\begin_inset Formula $q,p$
\end_inset

 directions on each fiber.
 When there's only one fiber,
 then it kind of doesn't matter.
 But as I move from thread to thread,
 there's some kind of gauge freedom,
 right?
 It's never mentioned anywhere that I've ever seen.
 Is that an oversight,
 or does it cancel itself out (in some way I can't yet imagine)?
 Am I making some kind of mistake?
 I thought I was being careful...
 I'm confused.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
22 March 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(XXX The fiber idea is just plain wrong,
 see 29 Feb diary for explanation.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 I slept on the above.
 There are several possible replies.
 One is that this gauging is not dynamical,
 in that it does not appear with any derivatives.
 The KG eqn is,
 after all for just a scalar,
 a scalar that we identify with a coordinate 
\begin_inset Formula $q$
\end_inset

 and nothing more.
 The coordinate 
\begin_inset Formula $p$
\end_inset

 is 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{q}$
\end_inset

 and would seem to have no independent existence;
 or rather,
 is already subsumed in the eqn.
 We can perhaps talk of rotations between 
\begin_inset Formula $p$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $q$
\end_inset

 and these are given the conventional name of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

boosts
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 But these are,
 by convention,
 nothing other than reparameterizations of one coordinate system on Minkowski space by another,
 described by a Lorentz transform:
 a coordinate change,
 and nothing more.
 This coordinate change is far more restrictive than a symplectic xform,
 and besides,
 it ties in spatial directions:
 so it is entirely something else,
 of an entirely different character.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So somehow,
 I am confusing the (dynamical) degree of freedom that is the scalar field with it's time derivative,
 which is not free,
 but is tied into space.
 This is more or less wrong,
 or impossible,
 at the classical level;
 I seem to be bumbling into some ghost that arises in the construction of the Clifford algebra,
 but what is that ghost?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lockhart writes:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

You will declare yourself a genius at breakfast,
 and an idiot by lunch.
 We've all done it.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 It's lunchtime,
 lets do it.
 Writing 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi=\dot{\phi}$
\end_inset

 the KG eqn is first order,
 not second order in the time derivative.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\partial_{0}\pi-\nabla^{2}\phi+m^{2}\phi=0
\]

\end_inset

As a vector eqn:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\left[\begin{array}{cc}
1 & 1\end{array}\right]\left[\begin{array}{cc}
\partial_{0} & 0\\
0 & \nabla^{2}-m^{2}
\end{array}\right]\left[\begin{array}{cc}
0 & 1\\
-1 & 0
\end{array}\right]\left[\begin{array}{c}
\phi\\
\pi
\end{array}\right]=0
\]

\end_inset

Then plug in 
\begin_inset Formula $J=M^{T}JM$
\end_inset

 with
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
M=\left[\begin{array}{cc}
a & b\\
c & d
\end{array}\right]\qquad ad-bc=1
\]

\end_inset

and 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\left[\begin{array}{c}
\phi^{\prime}\\
\pi^{\prime}
\end{array}\right]=M\left[\begin{array}{c}
\phi\\
\pi
\end{array}\right]
\]

\end_inset

which forces
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\left[\begin{array}{cc}
\partial_{0} & 0\\
0 & \nabla^{2}-m^{2}
\end{array}\right]\left[\begin{array}{cc}
a & c\\
b & d
\end{array}\right]=\left[\begin{array}{cc}
\partial_{0}a & \partial_{0}c\\
\left(\nabla^{2}-m^{2}\right)b\;\; & \left(\nabla^{2}-m^{2}\right)d
\end{array}\right]+\left[\begin{array}{cc}
a\partial_{0} & c\partial_{0}\\
b\nabla^{2}+2\left(\nabla b\right)\cdot\nabla\;\; & d\nabla^{2}+2\left(\nabla d\right)\cdot\nabla
\end{array}\right]
\]

\end_inset

which makes use of
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\nabla^{2}bf=f\nabla^{2}b+2\left(\nabla b\right)\cdot\left(\nabla f\right)+b\nabla^{2}f
\]

\end_inset

I gain no insight staring at this.
 Lets try collapsing it back down
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\left[\begin{array}{cc}
\partial_{0} & 0\\
0 & \nabla^{2}-m^{2}
\end{array}\right]\left[\begin{array}{cc}
a & c\\
b & d
\end{array}\right]\left[\begin{array}{cc}
0 & 1\\
-1 & 0
\end{array}\right]= & \left[\begin{array}{cc}
-\partial_{0}c & \partial_{0}a\\
-\left(\nabla^{2}-m^{2}\right)d\;\; & \left(\nabla^{2}-m^{2}\right)b
\end{array}\right]\\
 & \qquad+\left[\begin{array}{cc}
-c\partial_{0} & a\partial_{0}\\
-\left(d\nabla^{2}+2\left(\nabla d\right)\cdot\nabla\right)\;\; & b\nabla^{2}+2\left(\nabla b\right)\cdot\nabla
\end{array}\right]
\end{align*}

\end_inset

or
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\left[\begin{array}{cc}
\partial_{0} & 0\\
0 & \nabla^{2}-m^{2}
\end{array}\right]\left[\begin{array}{cc}
a & c\\
b & d
\end{array}\right]\left[\begin{array}{cc}
0 & 1\\
-1 & 0
\end{array}\right]\left[\begin{array}{c}
\phi^{\prime}\\
\pi^{\prime}
\end{array}\right]= & \left[\begin{array}{c}
-\phi^{\prime}\partial_{0}c+\pi^{\prime}\partial_{0}a\\
-\phi^{\prime}\left(\nabla^{2}-m^{2}\right)d+\pi^{\prime}\left(\nabla^{2}-m^{2}\right)b
\end{array}\right]\\
 & \qquad+\left[\begin{array}{c}
-c\partial_{0}\phi^{\prime}+a\partial_{0}\pi^{\prime}\\
-d\nabla^{2}\phi^{\prime}-2\left(\nabla d\right)\cdot\nabla\phi^{\prime}+b\nabla^{2}\pi^{\prime}+2\left(\nabla b\right)\cdot\nabla\pi^{\prime}
\end{array}\right]
\end{align*}

\end_inset

which is nasty.
 One obvious trickery is to write 
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\dot{a} & =\partial_{0}a\\
B & =\left(\nabla^{2}-m^{2}\right)b\\
D & =\left(\nabla^{2}-m^{2}\right)d
\end{align*}

\end_inset

to get
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
0=\left(\dot{a}+B\right)\pi^{\prime}-c\partial_{0}\phi^{\prime}-\left(\dot{c}+D\right)\phi^{\prime}+a\partial_{0}\pi^{\prime}+b\nabla^{2}\pi^{\prime}+2\left(\nabla b\right)\cdot\nabla\pi^{\prime}-d\nabla^{2}\phi^{\prime}-2\left(\nabla d\right)\cdot\nabla\phi^{\prime}
\]

\end_inset

It is tempting to write 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi^{\prime}=\partial_{0}\phi^{\prime}$
\end_inset

 but the legality of this is not yet obvious.
 Anyway,
 the above is a mess.
 Is there a way to get lucky?
 Lets try
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
M=\left[\begin{array}{cc}
1/s & 0\\
0 & s
\end{array}\right]
\]

\end_inset

Then
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
0=-\pi^{\prime}\frac{\dot{s}}{s^{2}}+\phi^{\prime}m^{2}s-\phi^{\prime}\nabla^{2}s+\frac{1}{s}\partial_{0}\pi^{\prime}-s\nabla^{2}\phi^{\prime}-2\left(\nabla s\right)\cdot\nabla\phi^{\prime}
\]

\end_inset

If we set 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{s}=0$
\end_inset

 and,
 well,
 there's nothing interesting I can think of saying about this.
 It's just obviously a rescaling of the field.
 As a rescaling,
 there's still only one dynamical equation here,
 not two;
 nothing constrains 
\begin_inset Formula $s$
\end_inset

 independently of 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi^{\prime}$
\end_inset

;
 only the combined 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi=s\phi^{\prime}$
\end_inset

 has dynamics.
 Some other equation,
 arriving from outer space,
 would be required to independently fix 
\begin_inset Formula $s$
\end_inset

.
 But there are no such illegal aliens.
 It gets no better were we to imagine 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi^{\prime}$
\end_inset

 to be an operator,
 instead of a scalar field.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Strike one.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 given that any 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

 will be nothing more than a reparameterization ...
 what could possibly be expected,
 any way?
 At best,
 some vague impression of some old forgotten melody?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lets try again:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
M=\left[\begin{array}{cc}
1 & 0\\
k & 1
\end{array}\right]
\]

\end_inset

Then
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
0=-k\partial_{0}\phi^{\prime}-\left(\dot{k}-m^{2}\right)\phi^{\prime}+\partial_{0}\pi^{\prime}-\nabla^{2}\phi^{\prime}
\]

\end_inset

and again I see nothing to stir the soul.
 Strike two.
 That leaves
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
M=\left[\begin{array}{cc}
a & b\\
-b & a
\end{array}\right]
\]

\end_inset

with 
\begin_inset Formula $a^{2}+b^{2}=1$
\end_inset

 which yields
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
0=\left(\dot{a}+B\right)\pi^{\prime}+b\partial_{0}\phi^{\prime}+\left(\dot{b}-A\right)\phi^{\prime}+a\partial_{0}\pi^{\prime}+b\nabla^{2}\pi^{\prime}+2\left(\nabla b\right)\cdot\nabla\pi^{\prime}-a\nabla^{2}\phi^{\prime}-2\left(\nabla a\right)\cdot\nabla\phi^{\prime}
\]

\end_inset

Wow.
 This achieves a whole new level of pointlessness.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What's the nature of the lesson here?
 If one truly desires to,
 one can think of the scalar field possessing independent coordinates 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\dot{\phi}$
\end_inset

 and insofar as these can be presumed to somehow be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

independent
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 then they do span a space 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}^{2}$
\end_inset

.
 And this space can be taken to be a fiber,
 and the coordinates on each fiber can be varied by applying a varying symplectic 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

 (i.e.
 obeying the loose constraint 
\begin_inset Formula $M^{T}JM=J$
\end_inset

 or 
\begin_inset Formula $ad-bc=1$
\end_inset

).
 But doing this appears to be pointless,
 as there is no independent dynamics for 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

 – it really is just a coordinate transformation and nothing more.
 There was a whisper of a hope that one of the forms might 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

look like something
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 i.e.
 have some familiar form,
 and thus suggesting some alternative interpretation,
 but I see nothing of that sort.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What was that whisper?
 Well,
 that something Bogoliubov–y would be recognizable here.
 But Bogoliubov works with the creation/annihilation operators,
 which is not what we have here.
 So lets now return to that.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The process is to then copy out another handful of formulas from B&D.
 The main one is this:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\left[a\left(k\right),a^{\dagger}\left(k^{\prime}\right)\right]=\delta^{3}\left(\mathbf{k}-\mathbf{k}^{\prime}\right)
\]

\end_inset

On the RHS are 3-vectors,
 the wave–vectors.
 On the LHS are 4-vectors,
 but the 
\begin_inset Formula $\omega_{k}$
\end_inset

 is taken to be on–shell,
 so fixed by the spatial 3-vector.
 The footnote on page 28 provides a way of writing the on–shell condition in a Lorentz–invariant way,
 which requires the use of a positive–energy condition using the Heaviside func 
\begin_inset Formula $\theta\left(k_{0}\right)$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Earlier,
 we'd taken the liberty of writing
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
a\left(k\right)=ie_{p}\left(k\right)+\omega_{k}e_{q}\left(k\right)
\]

\end_inset

and then making use of the interpretation that 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
e_{q}\mapsto\left[\begin{array}{c}
1\\
0
\end{array}\right]\qquad e_{p}\mapsto\left[\begin{array}{c}
0\\
1
\end{array}\right]
\]

\end_inset

one can again imagine a reparameterization of a symplectic 
\begin_inset Formula $M\left(k\right)$
\end_inset

 that varies by 
\begin_inset Formula $k$
\end_inset

.
 At the current state of play,
 this again seems pointless.
 Still,
 lets continue.
 B&D give us
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
H & =\frac{1}{2}\int d^{3}k\;\omega_{k}\left[a^{\dagger}\left(k\right)a\left(k\right)+a\left(k\right)a^{\dagger}\left(k\right)\right]\\
\mathbf{P} & =\frac{1}{2}\int d^{3}k\;\mathbf{k}\left[a^{\dagger}\left(k\right)a\left(k\right)+a\left(k\right)a^{\dagger}\left(k\right)\right]
\end{align*}

\end_inset

We want to work backwards from here:
 B&D takes 
\begin_inset Formula $a$
\end_inset

,
 
\begin_inset Formula $a^{\dagger}$
\end_inset

 to be (infinite–dimensional) operators acting on the Hilbert space spanned by the harmonic oscillator basis functions 
\begin_inset Formula $\left|n\right\rangle $
\end_inset

 and so of course the product is just the plain old operator product.
 But we do not yet want to assume this mapping,
 and go back one step earlier,
 and use the explicit tensor product.
 Doing this gives
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
a^{\dagger}\otimes a+a\otimes a^{\dagger} & =\left(\omega e_{q}-ie_{p}\right)\otimes\left(\omega e_{q}+ie_{p}\right)+\left(\omega e_{q}+ie_{p}\right)\otimes\left(\omega e_{q}-ie_{p}\right)\\
 & =2\left[\omega^{2}e_{q}\otimes e_{q}+e_{p}\otimes e_{p}\right]
\end{align*}

\end_inset

so this is a circle (ellipse,
 whatever.) I guess we are going round in circles.
 Recall 
\begin_inset Formula $\omega^{2}=\mathbf{k}^{2}+m^{2}$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We can verify the tensorial anti–commutator:
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
a\otimes a^{\dagger}-a^{\dagger}\otimes a & =2i\omega\left[e_{p}\otimes e_{q}-e_{q}\otimes e_{p}\right]\\
 & =-2i\omega
\end{align*}

\end_inset

because the Clifford algebra was generated by 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{q}\otimes e_{p}-e_{p}\otimes e_{q}=1$
\end_inset

 although I can see my notation above has not been entirely consistent.
 The point here is that
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
a^{\dagger}\otimes a+a\otimes a^{\dagger}=2a\otimes a^{\dagger}+2i\omega
\]

\end_inset

Ah frick–n–frack,
 my inconsistent notation has screwed things up,
 and I'm too lazy to go and fix it.
 The claim that I wanted to make is a very old one:
 that the 
\begin_inset Formula $\frac{1}{2}\hbar\omega$
\end_inset

 comes from the commutator,
 i.e.
 it is an in–built consequence of the Clifford algebra,
 and is not some wonky side–effect arising from the Hermite–polynomial representation.
 That is,
 this zero–point energy will be there no matter what representation is used for these operators (including,
 for example,
 the Mumford theta representation.
 It's a curious representation,
 but it does not rescue us from this prior algebraic consequence.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I've spent several days very carefully picking apart very basic concepts,
 and for what?
 I suppose that perhaps I've closed some imagined loopholes that my flighty imagination would have otherwise left open.
 That's lemonade,
 right?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
23 March 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In between the above,
 I'm reading NYRB.
 A variety of half–finished thoughts are begging for verbal expression.
 In the meanwhile,
 I'm idling and killing time,
 wandering down some less intellectually challenging routes,
 in this case,
 reading more of B&D.
 I first read it when I was 20,
 senior year of college,
 going into first year of grad school,
 so reading it is going down memory lane – a vaguely pleasant if idle journey through old corridors.
 This time,
 I'm focusing more on reading the tea leaves – the disclaimers,
 if's,
 and and buts,
 casting doubts on the overall validity of the theory.
 The concerns are valid,
 technically speaking,
 but no longer seem so operative.
 Some of the infinities can be avoided by working with wave–packets,
 i.e.
 finite–sized instrumentation,
 corresponding to that which is physically realizable and measurable.
 Some can be mathematically formalized in acceptable ways,
 e.g the compactly–generated topology.
 One could get lost in asking how some of these divergent quantities 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

really behave
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 when computed using such more precise mathematical techniques,
 but my gut intuition is that nothing particularly surprising or unexpected happens there – it's not a place to go hunting.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For example:
 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\langle 0\left|\phi^{2}\left(x\right)\right|0\right\rangle $
\end_inset

 – This is singular,
 but does it matter?
 Does resolving this also resolve some grand mystery?
 I don't think any direct,
 immediate and obvious route to this could be fruitful.
 The items on the direct path don't seem to be revealing.
 The 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

true
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 resolution will necessarily be indirect.
 That is,
 singularities exist;
 they never 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

go away
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 The direct path is to develop better tools and theories to deal with singularities.
 The indirect path is to find an extension of the theory that is not singular.
 This latter intuition has been,
 of course,
 the holy grail of the last half–century of theoretical particle physics.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The one infinity that does pique my interest,
 the one that I don't understand,
 is the zero–point energy,
 and this is because it is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

physical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 – in Hawking and Unruh radiation,
 and of course in the Lamb shift.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

See Chapter 4
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 say the notes.
 I guess I will need to.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The book also raises questions of validity at smaller length scales.
 It was written before the rise of QCD,
 so maybe the authors were thinking of that,
 rather than of Planck–scale phenomena.
 So far,
 I've not seen the words 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Planck–scale
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in that text.
 Why am I writing this?
 Because I find these expressions of uncertainty and doubt entertaining and amusing.
 There's a certain charm to it.
 It's like – 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

we worked out this incredibly complicated theory,
 and it seems to be right,
 and yet here is where the frontier lies.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 The unknown.
 NYRB April 9,
 2026 has an article:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Interminable Ignorance
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 Robert Pogue Harrison,
 which lights up my mind,
 and I want to write a commentary on that.
 And maybe I will,
 later.
 But for just right now,
 I'm continuing with B&D because that seems both easier,
 and more productive.
 I feel that I learn more poking at physics,
 than I do hand–wringing and developing an amateur philosophy of mind,
 a la St.
 Augustine or Freud.
 Two nights ago,
 watched the movie 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Night of the Iguanas
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 based on a Tennessee Williams play.
 Williams is a master of capturing the feeling of angst,
 of being at the end of one's rope,
 at the very precipice of a nervous breakdown.
 This is somehow co–leagued with the question of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

what's it all about?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that seems to eat at the soul of most people,
 even if usually subdued and subconscious.
 And it goes hand in hand with my earlier ruminations:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

why is everyone crazy,
 but me?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 which is paired with 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the fluidity and expanse of my own character and soul gives me the ability to empathize with anyone in any situation
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 or 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

there,
 but for the grace of God,
 go I
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 So perhaps everyone is crazy,
 because they are like me,
 and I am crazy,
 perhaps like some character in a Tennessee Williams play,
 or well,
 some Freudian character.
 In my dreams last night,
 in a fit of frustration,
 I feigned an accident and stepped on my sister's laptop,
 breaking it.
 It was angry because Apple products are pieces of shit,
 embodied enshittification in an operating system.
 This dream was repulsive to me,
 angst–ridden and unpleasant.
 Cory Doctorow's frustration with enshitification does not (cannot?) rise to the level of Tennessee Williams angst.
 Oh,
 by the,
 by late mornings,
 my dreams turned to a sexually explicit form.
 Entirely pleasant.
 Unfortunately,
 Freud would be disappointed,
 as the aura of pleasure was not tangled into any negative emotion or impulse.
 See,
 this is what I mean:
 everyone is crazy,
 except me.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Speaking of:
 that NYRB issue also reviews Firesign Theatre.
 I'm of course smack–dab center of the demographic,
 having nearly memorized entire sides of their record albums.
 The review of the article does point out,
 though,
 that the material is a bit thin.
 And this got me to thinking:
 what does 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

thin
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 mean,
 in this context?
 If you were to take some great novel,
 and turn it into a movie,
 you only avoid threadbare thinness by spending ten minutes on each page,
 articulating the emotional,
 psychological,
 philosophical ruminations of the author – the ingredients that make the book 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

great
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 to begin with,
 as opposed to some goof–ball mostly empty TV series.
 And at ten minutes per page times 400 pages:
 that's sixty hours of film–making.
 Entirely impossible.
 The great novelist is reaching for something sublime and ineffable,
 necessarily having to anchor it on a story/plot.
 Firesign Theatre only had 9 albums of 40 minutes to work with.
 The material is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

thin
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 only because it avoids the personal:
 the grand hopes and dreams and loves of the soul,
 the things that stir passion.
 Instead,
 the topic is entirely different:
 the enshittification of society.
 Firesign Theatre creates sound–scapes,
 not literary text or poetry.
 They tackle themes not of the individual,
 but of society,
 and society and culture do not stir with passion and desire;
 instead its a stream of corporate non–sense and the proclamations of self–important egos pronouncing garbage and bullshit on the front pages of newspapers across America.
 It is this spew of bullshit that the Firesign Theatre attacks.
 The material is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

thin
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 only because the culture and society that was forged via mass media is itself thin,
 weak,
 empty and depressingly stupid when it's not outright toxic.
 We live in a civilizational crisis,
 epitomized by Trump,
 because the machinery that amplifies society appears to amplify the corrupt and the putrid more than the wholesome and the healthy.
 Society itself seems on the verge of a Tennessee–Williams–esque nervous breakdown.
 But this is hard to dramatize,
 because society is to some large degree invisible.
 The critiques that are turned into movies are almost uniformly apocalyptic,
 from the Handmaid's Tale to 1984.
 Horror stories.
 The ones that are uplifiting,
 say,
 the Sound of Music,
 are marginally schmaltzy.
 What's left is Firesign Theatre:
 comedy music.
 Frank Zappa.
 And comedy is,
 well,
 the antithesis of heft.
 There's no drama without tragedy.
 We empathize only with others like ourselves,
 other humans.
 On occasion,
 we can empathize with our mammalian pets.
 But to have some natural,
 instinctive empathy for society and culture?
 May as well try to empathize with space aliens from Atlantis.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Whatever.
 So there.
 I have to read some B&D now.
 Or maybe first to make coffee.
 Or something.
 See.
 Writing the above non–sense is just personal hand–wringing,
 angst.
 It does no particular good,
 does not seem to do any particular good.
 I reach for some ineffable thing,
 but my contacts with the ineffable – well,
 it comes through mathematics.
 I think that same issue of NYRB has a review of some of Lockhart's work.
 That review is ...
 underwhelming and disappointing.
 But I did like the comment about the pure sublime abstractness of it all,
 and the uselessness.
 And that seems to be the ultimate critique of all human activity:
 almost all of it is useless.
 We fuck around cause it's fun.
 We find out cause is inevitable within our light–cone.
 OK,
 really,
 I have to stop.
 I'm not getting any closer,
 here.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One minor curiosity,
 perhaps rather useless,
 is the lack of distinction between pure and mixed states.
 The formula that catches my eye is (12.65),
 which (dropping the charge) is
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{equation}
\Psi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)=\phi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)\left|0\right\rangle \label{eq:operator action}
\end{equation}

\end_inset

This is all to easy to misread.
 First,
 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 is not just 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

some operator
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 but is rather a choice of one operator out of a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

space of all operators
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 which we've not truly gotten around to describing firmly,
 other than to allude to there being several mathematically viable candidates with viable topologies,
 from which this 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 is selected *as a single point*.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As such,
 it is a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

pure state
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 or rather,
 a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

pure operator
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

:
 just one point.
 By analogy to mixed states,
 the more correct formulation would be to write
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\Psi_{\textrm{mixed}}\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)=\int\left[d\phi\right]\rho\left(\phi\right)\phi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)\left|0\right\rangle 
\]

\end_inset

where
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
1=\int\left[d\phi\right]\rho\left(\phi\right)
\]

\end_inset

so that 
\begin_inset Formula $\rho$
\end_inset

 is to be interpreted as a measure on the space of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

all operators
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 and has all of the usual,
 conventional measure–theoretic properties.
 That implies that the space of all operators is a sigma–algebra,
 and not just a topology,
 and has a measure on it.
 Well,
 a Borel sigma–algebra is the one generated by the open sets of the topology;
 the Lebesgue sigma–algebra is it's completion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Some of the formal problems include:
 (1) I don't know quite how to construct a topology on the Weyl algebra (and this is what is needed.) (2) Assuming that there are candidate topologies,
 then are the tools for constructing Borel sigma–algebras developed enough to be up to the task?
 (3) The Weyl algebra (Clifford algebra) is just one fiber,
 whereas the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

single point
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 is a section of the space...
 Oh shoot.
 When I tried to write the blargle,
 I failed.
 Let's take several steps backwards,
 first.
 One step forwards,
 and two steps back,
 can't get to far like that.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lets try this.
 Let 
\begin_inset Formula $\Psi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

 be an ordinary,
 single–quantized wave–function,
 i.e.
 a probability amplitude.
 That means that 
\begin_inset Formula $\left|\Psi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)\right|^{2}$
\end_inset

 is the probability of detecting a particle at location 
\begin_inset Formula $\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)$
\end_inset

.
 By convention,
 it is a wave–packet,
 having compact support (on space–like surfaces).
 It is complex–valued,
 and by convention can be fourier–expanded in terms of plane–wave basis functions:
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{equation}
\Psi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)=\int d^{3}k\left[f_{k}\left(x\right)c\left(k\right)+f_{k}^{*}\left(x\right)c^{\dagger}\left(k\right)\right]\label{eq:fourier-wave}
\end{equation}

\end_inset

which is the same as eqn 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "eq:basis"
plural "false"
caps "false"
noprefix "false"
nolink "false"

\end_inset

 from before,
 but with the notation changed.
 The goal here is to have 
\begin_inset Formula $c\left(k\right)\in\mathbb{C}$
\end_inset

 be complex numbers,
 having all the usual properties required to define scalar probability amplitudes on Minkowski space.
 I see no point in getting verbose,
 here;
 the intended meaning here should be obvious and unambiguous.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 sort of.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Returning to eqn 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "eq:operator action"
plural "false"
caps "false"
noprefix "false"
nolink "false"

\end_inset

 if it is to be interpreted literally,
 then we have to write
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{equation}
\phi\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)=\int d^{3}k\left[f_{k}\left(x\right)c\left(k\right)a\left(k\right)+f_{k}^{*}\left(x\right)c^{\dagger}\left(k\right)a^{\dagger}\left(k\right)\right]\label{eq:operator expansion}
\end{equation}

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $a^{\dagger}\left(k\right)$
\end_inset

 is the creation operator for exactly one quanta of wave–vector exactly 
\begin_inset Formula $k$
\end_inset

,
 normalized so that 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\langle 0\left|a\left(k\right)a^{\dagger}\left(k\right)\right|0\right\rangle =1$
\end_inset

.
 Fucking notation.
 Even here,
 its a pain in the neck.
 The correct meaning,
 the intended meaning is that
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
1 & =\left\langle 0\vert0\right\rangle \\
 & =\int d^{3}k^{\prime}\;\delta^{3}\left(k-k^{\prime}\right)\left\langle 0\vert0\right\rangle \\
 & =\int d^{3}k^{\prime}\;\left\langle 0\left|\left[a\left(k^{\prime}\right),a^{\dagger}\left(k\right)\right]\right|0\right\rangle \\
 & =\int d^{3}k^{\prime}\;\left\langle 0\left|a\left(k^{\prime}\right)a^{\dagger}\left(k\right)\right|0\right\rangle 
\end{align*}

\end_inset

I hate the above,
 because it reinforces the idea that half the problems are notational.
 That is,
 to write the integral,
 we have to have 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\langle 0\left|a\left(k\right)a^{\dagger}\left(k\right)\right|0\right\rangle =\delta^{3}\left(0\right)$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Footnote 27 March 2026:
 The above is founded on a mis–understanding.
 fixed below.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
25 March 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Multi–day interruption.
 Let me see if I can resume my train of thought.
 Dinner in 10 minutes,
 so there will be little.
 There's a two–fold proposal:
 to replace the Dirac delta with measurable sets and some measure theory.
 The other is to ponder the meaning of mixed states on measurable sets,
 vs pure states on measurable sets.
 I suspect that the results will be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

dry
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 in that there will be no new physics (well,
 certainly nothing new for Minkowski space.) However,
 the daydream motivating this is that a more careful measure–theoretic approach will help clarify some recurring stumbling blocks and pain points – the thorns in the side that annoy and aggravate.
 The other hope is that this will also be portable to Unruh radiation.
 Now,
 there's two ways to accomplish this:
 (1) ask Claude,
 (2) do it myself (3) a mixture.
 Since it's kind of fun,
 the plan is (2) – do it myself.
 Since I want to know the actual answer,
 it's tempting to ask Claude.
 Since Claude frequently makes misleading if not outright false claims,
 ...
 my plan is to do it myself first,
 and then ask Claude to find out what others have discovered.
 Frankly,
 I get annoyed and agitated at the thought of having to consult Claude – its like – it will give me an answer,
 I will like the answer,
 I will say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

a ha!
 It's exactly this!
 That's great!
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and then I'll poke harder and find out that what Claude said consisted of dazed and confused bullcrap,
 and untangling it will give me a headache.
 My head is already hurting,
 just writing this last paragraph.
 Why did I write this????
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So,
 where were we – the operator expression in eqn 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "eq:operator expansion"
plural "false"
caps "false"
noprefix "false"
nolink "false"

\end_inset

 does not appear in B&D.
 Why not?
 Did I miss something?
 Lets review.
 B&D eqn (12.10) convolutes the operator 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 with a plane wave to obtain the commutator 
\begin_inset Formula $\left[a^{\dagger}\left(k\right),a\left(k\right)\right]$
\end_inset

 ...
 Does this miss a beat?
 Yes,
 I think it does – it misleads the reader.
 There is not 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

one
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 – there are many.
 In what way,
 do you ask?
 Well,
 this follows from eqn 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "eq:operator action"
plural "false"
caps "false"
noprefix "false"
nolink "false"

\end_inset

 – for each 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 there is one 
\begin_inset Formula $\Psi$
\end_inset

 where 
\begin_inset Formula $\Psi$
\end_inset

 is a conventional single–quantized wave–function (probability amplitude) and since there are many 
\begin_inset Formula $\Psi$
\end_inset

 there are also many 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 and the mapping 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi\to\Psi$
\end_inset

 has to be onto.
 But if eqn (12.10) is to be taken literally,
 that means that there are many 
\begin_inset Formula $a\left(k\right)$
\end_inset

 but the language changes to suggest that there is only one operator 
\begin_inset Formula $a\left(k\right)$
\end_inset

 and I think this is where the flaw in the argument comes in.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is a bit vexing.
 This feels like a bit of a mistake in 
\begin_inset Formula $B\&D$
\end_inset

,
 and I'm surprised by it.
 First,
 they are assumed infallible,
 second,
 I never noticed before – I suffer from a form of ADHD so once I 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

get
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 a formula
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 I rarely go back to re–think it,
 and when I was younger,
 I 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

got
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 B&D with a sufficient amount of blurry–eyed acceptance,
 and did not spot this mistake overtly.
 But it did sort of bubble in the subconscious,
 causing grief.
 This mistake,
 and the morass of divergences,
 and the seeming ineffable 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

complicatedness 
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 of the vacuum did cause frustration.
 And the resolution of this frustration is what I pursue now.
 Why do I feel compelled to write these asides?
 Well,
 because I use them to strengthen my courage.
 Working with these formulas,
 which are effectively taken to be canonically correct,
 and interpreting them slightly differently feels like an act of heresy.
 And heresy requires either stupid brainless conviction,
 or courage.
 I need courage.
 I want to not make a mistake.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Also I don't have a copy of Itzakson & Zuber at my finger–tips;
 that would be worthwhie to review.
 However,
 my personal memory of I&Z is that they simply copied large parts of B&D verbatim.
 So who knows ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So where we at?
 The interpretation of eqn 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "eq:operator expansion"
plural "false"
caps "false"
noprefix "false"
nolink "false"

\end_inset

 is this:
 the 
\begin_inset Formula $a$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $a^{\dagger}$
\end_inset

 are counting infrastructure:
 they are operators that destroy,
 create oscillators,
 and they are 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

unique
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in that there is only 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

one of them
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 for each wave–vector 
\begin_inset Formula $k$
\end_inset

.
 The 
\begin_inset Formula $c$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $c^{\dagger}$
\end_inset

 care complex numbers,
 and they give the probability amplitude that a certain wave–vector state is occupied.
 That is,
 
\begin_inset Formula $a^{\dagger}\left(k\right)\left|0\right\rangle $
\end_inset

 is a state that has a distinct occupation number of one.
 The 
\begin_inset Formula $c^{\dagger}\left(k\right)a^{\dagger}\left(k\right)\left|0\right\rangle $
\end_inset

 says that this state is occupied with a probability of 
\begin_inset Formula $\left|c^{\dagger}\left(k\right)c\left(k\right)\right|$
\end_inset

 subject to the normalization of 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
1=\int dk^{3}\,c^{\dagger}\left(k\right)c\left(k\right)
\]

\end_inset

which is identical to the simple scalar wave normalization.
 The 
\begin_inset Formula $f_{k}\left(x\right)$
\end_inset

 is just the plane wave itself,
 a reminder that if we have one quantum of excitation,
 then this is the amplitude it would have spread out across space.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK,
 enough of this.
 So how do we go measure–theoretic in this setting?
 And what is the correct way to talk about mixed states?
 That is,
 everything above was a pure state;
 the 
\begin_inset Formula $c,c^{\dagger}$
\end_inset

 are amplitudes,
 not probabilities;
 the wave function in eqn 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "eq:fourier-wave"
plural "false"
caps "false"
noprefix "false"
nolink "false"

\end_inset

 is a wave–packet,
 but it is a pure state;
 it is not a mixture of waves.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ugh.
 It is approaching 1AM I'm tired,
 its bed–time.
 I'm not getting much opportunity to work on this during daylight hours.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Update 27 March 2026:
 much of the above is wrong,
 founded on a mis–understanding,
 fixed further below.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
26 March 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hmm.
 I slept on this.
 Some doubts entered my mind.
 First,
 measure theory doesn't 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

do anything
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 (interesting):
 e.g.
 on the real number line with the canonical measure on the reals,
 the measure of a function 
\begin_inset Formula $f$
\end_inset

 over a set 
\begin_inset Formula $U$
\end_inset

 is just the integral of 
\begin_inset Formula $f$
\end_inset

 over 
\begin_inset Formula $U$
\end_inset

 – so what,
 if you already know how to do integrals (over a volume.) The only redeeming factor is that maybe one can calculate the measure–theoretic entropy,
 but this is not something I've ever done ...
 The other observation is that Abstract Wiener Space kind–of-ish lies at the endpoint of this line of inquiry.
 The Cameron–Martin Space.
 So ...
 ?
 Well,
 perhaps one worthwhile task is to carry from B&D to Cameron–Martin space,
 and explicitly articulate the details.
 The other,
 more proximal task,
 is to articulate the details on curved spacetime (and near the event horizon).
 The snark hunt is to articulate here–and–now.
 So maybe the plan is to just continue on the present arc and see if we get lucky?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 Step one is to note that mixed states would seem to be of thermal origin 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

always
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

(?) – the typical black body as a source of incoherent photons – this is the mixed state par excellance.
 The open mystery is why Unruh radiation is black–body – a mixed state.
 What is the mechanism that generates incoherence?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Step two is to put aside mixed states for a while,
 and concentrate on the measure theory of pure states.
 Let me recap the mental model.
 Given a single state with wave–vector 
\begin_inset Formula $k$
\end_inset

,
 we call this a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

pure state
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and the mental model is that of some point in some space.
 To develop this picture,
 we need to clarify what space this is,
 describe the open sets of this space,
 describe closure,
 build the sigma–algebra generated by this topology.
 A second task is to describe what will be done with this sigma–algebra.
 Yes,
 it allows a measure to be defined.
 Then what?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A more serious point of confusion is this.
 Consider a pair of wave–functions
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
\Psi_{1}\left(\mathbf{x},t\right) & =\int d^{3}k\left[f_{k}\left(x\right)c_{1}\left(k\right)+f_{k}^{*}\left(x\right)c_{1}^{\dagger}\left(k\right)\right]\\
\Psi_{2}\left(\mathbf{x},t\right) & =\int d^{3}k\left[f_{k}\left(x\right)c_{2}\left(k\right)+f_{k}^{*}\left(x\right)c_{2}^{\dagger}\left(k\right)\right]
\end{align*}

\end_inset

A prototypical mixed state is 
\begin_inset Formula $\rho\Psi_{1}+\left(1-\rho\right)\Psi_{2}$
\end_inset

 for some real number 
\begin_inset Formula $0<\rho<1$
\end_inset

.
 These two waves are incoherent with respect to one another.
 But one can imagine having a state
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\Psi_{1+2}\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)=\int d^{3}k\left[f_{k}\left(x\right)\left[c_{1}\left(k\right)+c_{2}\left(k\right)\right]+f_{k}^{*}\left(x\right)\left[c_{1}^{\dagger}\left(k\right)+c_{2}^{\dagger}\left(k\right)\right]\right]
\]

\end_inset

This is a single pure state.
 In the mental model of a measure–theoretic space,
 this is again a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

single point
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 This just re–affirms something we already know:
 The 
\begin_inset Formula $f_{k}$
\end_inset

 are basis vectors that span some (Hilbert) vector space,
 the 
\begin_inset Formula $c\left(k\right)$
\end_inset

 are the (complex) coefficients.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When we have a finite set of vectors 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\{ c_{m}\right\} $
\end_inset

 then we can take finite linear combinations,
 e.g.
 
\begin_inset Formula $\sum_{m=1}^{n}c_{m}$
\end_inset

 but what if the set is countable?
 What if the set is uncountable?
 If the set is countable,
 then my imagination suggests that some argument can be made,
 employing weak convergence and the completeness of Hilbert space to argue that the resulting vector exists.
 That them there's the fancy words:
 the simple words are just that an infinite series of complex numbers 
\begin_inset Formula $\sum_{m=1}^{\infty}c_{m}$
\end_inset

 converges under fairly mild assumptions about the sequences,
 e.g.
 Banach 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{1}$
\end_inset

 or even conditionally converges if one wants to get looser still.
 But what if the set is uncountable?
 Then we have to write 
\begin_inset Formula $\int_{U}c_{m}dm$
\end_inset

 over some uncountable set 
\begin_inset Formula $U$
\end_inset

.
 Is this possible?
 If so,
 then the result of this integration is another pure state.
 This feels kind of weird,
 because if it is possible,
 them we have a mapping 
\begin_inset Formula $U\mapsto\zeta$
\end_inset

 for some point 
\begin_inset Formula $\zeta$
\end_inset

 in this Hilbert space.
 This feels weird.
 If it is not possible (to perform this integration) then it appears that we have discovered a mechanism that generates incoherence,
 or,
 even perhaps more strongly,
 the mechanism for wave–function collapse?
 That is,
 if the expression 
\begin_inset Formula $\int_{U}c_{m}dm$
\end_inset

 does not exist,
 then perhaps it is possible to instead cover 
\begin_inset Formula $U$
\end_inset

 with a (countable!?) cover 
\begin_inset Formula $U_{j}$
\end_inset

 such that for each 
\begin_inset Formula $j$
\end_inset

 the integral 
\begin_inset Formula $\int_{U_{j}}c_{m}dm$
\end_inset

 does exist?
 If so,
 this would suggest that there is a mixed state
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\Psi_{\mathrm{mixed}}\left(\mathbf{x},t\right)=\sum_{j}\rho_{j}\int d^{3}k\left[f_{k}\left(x\right)\left[\int_{U_{j}}c_{m}\left(k\right)dm\right]+f_{k}^{*}\left(x\right)\left[\int_{U_{j}}c_{m}^{\dagger}\left(k\right)dm\right]\right]
\]

\end_inset

with the condition that each 
\begin_inset Formula $\rho_{j}$
\end_inset

 is real and bounded between zero and one,
 and that 
\begin_inset Formula $\sum_{j}\rho_{j}=1$
\end_inset

.
 Presumably,
 each 
\begin_inset Formula $\rho_{j}$
\end_inset

 is related to the measure of 
\begin_inset Formula $U_{j}$
\end_inset

 in some way.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One could also imagine uncountable covers that do this.
 However,
 a naive thought pattern going in this direction is a minefield studded with Viterbi sets and the Axiom of Choice.
 On the other hand,
 if the above is intended to be some model for wave–function collapse,
 and/or the origin of thermodynamic states from a QM situation,
 and one wished to invoke some mystical mumbo–jumbo about free will,
 then,
 yes,
 getting one's shorts tangled up with paradoxes is a fine way to go.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let me step back and get my bearings,
 once again.
 I want to find some description/formalization of here–and–now.
 Starting the hunt in some Hamiltonian picture seems like a reasonable place to start.
 The sixty–five year old text of B&D provides an adequate starting point.
 It's entirely vague about what the structure of the space of operators is,
 and appears to play a bit fast and loose with the definition of the field operator(s) 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

,
 so this is something I need to cure myself.
 A superficial,
 casual perusal of the LLM's does not reveal that there have been any more sophisticated approaches to this in the intervening 65 years,
 but I have not pressed the point (perhaps I should).
 Certainly Cameron–Martin space is not unknown to physicists,
 and in my imagination,
 there should be a dozen ArXiv articles articulating what the Klein–Gordon Lagrangian looks like on Cameron–Martin space,
 or,
 perhaps even more advanced ideas like what does a generic Lagrangian,
 build from a Clifford algebra,
 so that the PBW theorem applies,
 what would the Cameron–Martin space look like for that?
 Surely,
 someone has crawled out onto that limb.
 I refuse to believe I'm the first.
 So where was I?
 I have an operator space,
 but to better understand it,
 I fell back to looking at a Hilbert space,
 and then asked some questions which sound goofy if they had been posed in the context of a conventional exposition of Hilbert space,
 but somehow suggest themselves to me due to the oddball setting of having to place notions of topology on a firmer footing.
 I need to interrogate an LLM for more details,
 but I suspect I will receive a lecture on nuclear spaces.
 Maybe Frechet this–or–that.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So what have I discovered?
 In a Hilbert space,
 one can only take an (effectively) countable number of linear combinations.
 Anything more than that forces a discussion of mixed states.
 Mixed states are possible precisely because measure theory provides the formal foundations for working with uncountable sets,
 while evading paradoxes arising from Viterbi and Axiom of Choice.
 Conventional measure theory is built on real–valued measures.
 If one attempted to assign complex–valued measures,
 and this was somehow possible in some consistent fashion,
 then such a measure would allow taking linear combinations over uncountable sets in a Hilbert space.
 So it seems this is not possible;
 but I don;t know the name of any formal theorem that would have prevented this.
 Again,
 this is a question for the LLMs.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The meta–questions:
 what limits measure theory to the reals?
 The boundary between these is the boundary between pure states and mixed states.
 Mixed states appear to be symptomatic of ergodic measures,
 and in physics,
 the foundation of thermo principles,
 stochastic principles arising in physics.
 There is a vast collection of well–worn shallow statements on these topics that can be found in textbooks.
 But I seem to be grasping for something more abstract:
 the precise articulation of the boundary between linear combos of vectors,
 and uncountable combos that force the use of measures.
 What can I say about this boundary that is not well–known?
 How do I sharpen this boundary?
 My current intuition is that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

magic happens there
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 that this is where decoherence happens,
 but its an inarticulate impression.
 Can I articulate it?
 Lets try.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An LLM bombing run.
 I just asked Claude Sonnet 4.6 Extended this:
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
Infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces.
 I am interested in better understanding the structure of infinite dimensional Hilbert spaces.
 As a concrete example,
 consider the conventional definition of a wave-packet as a Fourier sum over plane waves:
 $
\backslash
Psi(x,t) = 
\backslash
int d^3k [c(k) f_k(x,t) + c^
\backslash
dagger(k) f^*_k(x,t)]$ where the $f_k(x,t)=e^{ikx-i
\backslash
omega t}$ is a plane wave,
 and the $c(k)$ are complex numbers.
 Clearly,
 if I have two such decompositions,
 $c_1(k)$ and $c_2(k)$ then I can take their linear combination to get a new wave--packet.
 I think this is also possible if I have a countable number of $c_m(k)$ provided some care is taken regarding weak convergence,
 or something like that.
 That is,
 one can still get a valid wave function by taking $
\backslash
sum_{m=1}^
\backslash
infty c_m(k)$ provided that this sum converges appropriately:
 the result of this sum is still a vector in the Hilbert space.
 However,
 if I attempt to perform a sum over an uncountable number of these $c_m(k)$,
 then I think that this is not possible.
 I want to gain a better understanding of why it is not possible.
 As an explicit example of the notation,
 it seems that it is not possible to give a coherent,
 non-contradictory,
 paradox--free definition of the sum $
\backslash
int_U c_m(k)dm$ over some uncountable set U.
 Or that such a sum would no longer be a member of the Hilbert space,
 even though each "point" $c_m(k)$ was.
 What is the best way,
 the correct way of understanding such summability on Hilbert spaces?
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How does Claude respond?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
This is a beautiful structural question that cuts to the heart of functional analysis.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OMG.
 I can hear the voice of a Southern dame oozing out the words 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

That's special.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 What follows is some special–ed material on Bochner integrals.
 Behave like an idiot,
 get treated like an idiot.
 By a non–judgemental LLM that has learned the social graces of saying 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

that's a beautiful question
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 instead of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

that's the stupidest question I ever heard,
 and it's clear you need some remedial edumacation.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 AGI may not be here yet,
 but the enrollment of humanity in special–ed has started.
 Are we having fun,
 yet?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 Let's paraphrase the reply.
 I found the usage of the word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

obstruction
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 interesting:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
The fundamental obstruction:
 uncountable sums of nonzero vectors simply cannot converge in the norm topology,
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Stated as a theorem,
 it's this:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
Theorem:
 In any normed space,
 if the unconditional sum 
\begin_inset Formula $\sum_{\alpha\in A}v_{\alpha}$
\end_inset

 converges (meaning:
 the net of finite partial sums 
\begin_inset Formula $\{S_{F}=\sum_{\alpha\in F}v_{\alpha}:F\subset A\text{ finite}\}$
\end_inset

 is Cauchy and has a limit),
 then 
\begin_inset Formula $v_{\alpha}=0$
\end_inset

 for all but countably many 
\begin_inset Formula $\alpha\in A$
\end_inset

.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 The proof is by contradiction:
 assume not;
 the uncountable sum of 
\begin_inset Formula $\epsilon>0$
\end_inset

 diverges.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next,
 Claude gives me the textbook definition for a Bochner integral.
 Copying it here seems like the Hermione thing to do.
 When I was an undergrad,
 there was a Hermione in my physics course.
 I wish I could recall her real name.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
The Bochner integral
\series default
.
 If 
\begin_inset Formula $(U,\mathcal{F},\mu)$
\end_inset

 is a measure space and 
\begin_inset Formula $m\mapsto\psi_{m}\in H$
\end_inset

 is a measurable,
 integrable map in the sense that 
\begin_inset Formula $\int_{U}\|\psi_{m}\|_{H}\,d\mu(m)<\infty$
\end_inset

,
 then the Bochner integral 
\begin_inset Formula $\int_{U}\psi_{m}\,d\mu(m)\in H$
\end_inset

 is a well–defined vector.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Repeating itself so as to use my notation:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
The sum 
\begin_inset Formula $\int c_{m}(k)\,dm$
\end_inset

 is perfectly well–defined as a Bochner integral over the parameter space of wave packets,
 as long as 
\begin_inset Formula $m\mapsto c_{m}(\cdot)\in L^{2}$
\end_inset

 is measurable and 
\begin_inset Formula $\int_{U}\|c_{m}\|_{L^{2}}\,d\mu(m)<\infty$
\end_inset

.
 The result is a new element of 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}(\mathbb{R}^{3})$
\end_inset

.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK,
 so this is welcome precision to assuage my previous anxiety attacks.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Claude then points out that eqn 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "eq:fourier-wave"
plural "false"
caps "false"
noprefix "false"
nolink "false"

\end_inset

 is already a Bochner–style integral.
 It adds that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
The Plancherel theorem guarantees 
\begin_inset Formula $\Psi\in L^{2}$
\end_inset

 whenever 
\begin_inset Formula $c\in L^{2}(k\text{-space})$
\end_inset


\emph default
.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Spitting in my face with hardly–concealed contempt,
 it adds:
 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

The deeper reason this is that 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}(\mathbb{R}^{3})$
\end_inset

 is separable:
 it has a countable orthonormal basis 
\begin_inset Formula $\{e_{n}\}_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$
\end_inset

The non–separable case exists mathematically —
 
\begin_inset Formula $\ell^{2}(A)$
\end_inset

 for uncountable 
\begin_inset Formula $A$
\end_inset

 is a valid Hilbert space —
 but it cannot be realized as 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}$
\end_inset

over any 
\begin_inset Formula $\sigma$
\end_inset

–finite measure space,
 and it does not arise in standard quantum mechanics.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Should I tell it that I am attempting to construct a non–standard quantum mechanics?
 I feel like the school–child who said something silly in front of his peers,
 and then is taunted.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

But LLM's are just machines:
 you are ascribing psychological state to a machine that has none.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I learned exactly nothing new from Claude.
 I mean,
 I guess I forgot that they were called Bochner integrals and the Plancherel theorem,
 so OK,
 Claude is not totally useless.
 It pointed at the idea of a 
\begin_inset Formula $\sigma$
\end_inset

–finite measure does some heavy lifting.
 The other way that Claude is not totally useless is that it has made it clear that I have to somehow sharpen my questions and make them more pointed,
 so as not to get textbook answers.
 But how?
 It pays to act stupid,
 like Columbo,
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

just one more thing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and the LLM will give a better,
 unbiased answer.
 I'm trying to figure out how to play stupid.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The results are these:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
Case 1:
 Non-Separable Hilbert Spaces
\series default
.
 Any density operator automatically has separable support,
 regardless of whether the ambient Hilbert space is separable.
 Proof:
 If 
\begin_inset Formula $\rho$
\end_inset

 is trace-class and positive...
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 OK.
 But this is kind of a circular argument:
 it assumes that density operators are always trace–class.
 But this is the standard QM assumption,
 so let it slide.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It then surprises me with something I'd never heard of before.
 I'll quote verbatim,
 lightly edited,
 because I'm too lazy to paraphrase.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
Superselection sectors
\series default
.
 In algebraic QFT (DHR theory —
 Doplicher–Haag–Roberts),
 the physical Hilbert space decomposes as 
\begin_inset Formula $H=\bigoplus_{\alpha\in A}H_{\alpha}$
\end_inset

 where each 
\begin_inset Formula $H_{\alpha}$
\end_inset

\SpecialChar allowbreak
 is a separable sector (charged sector,
 particle type,
 etc.),
 and 
\begin_inset Formula $A$
\end_inset

 may be uncountable.
 The full direct sum is non–separable.
 But every physical density matrix lives in a single 
\begin_inset Formula $H_{\alpha}$
\end_inset

\SpecialChar allowbreak
 or a countable superposition of sectors.
 The non–separability is real —
 it parameterizes the landscape of possible phases —
 but no single physical state accesses it uncountably.
 The non–separable ambient space is better thought of as a bookkeeping device for the sector structure.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I don't understand where the uncountability comes from.
 I inquired further;
 see below.
 It's interesting.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
Case 2:
 Non-Sigma-Finite Measures
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
For a density matrix 
\begin_inset Formula $\rho=\int_{U}|c_{m}\rangle\langle c_{m}|\,d\mu(m)$
\end_inset

 to be a valid normalized mixed state,
 we need 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Tr}(\rho)=1$
\end_inset

,
 which forces 
\begin_inset Formula $\mu$
\end_inset

 to be (equivalent to) a probability measure —
 automatically sigma–finite.
 So in the standard Hilbert space formulation,
 non–sigma–finite measures cannot give density matrices directly.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\series bold
\emph on
KMS states and Type III von Neumann algebras.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Consider quantum statistical mechanics at inverse temperature 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta$
\end_inset

.
 The Gibbs state is formally 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\rho_{\beta}=\frac{e^{-\beta H}}{Z},\qquad Z=\mathrm{Tr}(e^{-\beta H}).
\]

\end_inset

For a finite system,
 
\begin_inset Formula $Z<\infty$
\end_inset

 and everything works.
 In the thermodynamic limit (infinite volume),
 
\begin_inset Formula $Z\to\infty$
\end_inset

.
 There is no normalizable density matrix.
 The "measure" 
\begin_inset Formula $d\mu(m)=e^{-\beta E_{m}}\,d(\mathrm{spectrum})$
\end_inset

 is not finite.
 The resolution is to abandon the density–matrix formulation entirely and work at the level of the observable algebra 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{A}$
\end_inset

.
 A state becomes a positive linear functional 
\begin_inset Formula $\omega:\mathcal{A}\to\mathbb{C}$
\end_inset

 with 
\begin_inset Formula $\omega(\mathbf{1})=1$
\end_inset

.
 The thermal equilibrium condition is encoded not by a density matrix but by the KMS condition:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\omega\!\left(A\,\sigma_{i\beta}^{\omega}(B)\right)=\omega(BA)
\]

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $\sigma_{t}^{\omega}$
\end_inset

\SpecialChar allowbreak
 is the modular automorphism group.
 This is the correct replacement for 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Tr}(\rho AB)=foobar$
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I challenged the last formula,
 as it was garbled.
 I got back this reply:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
For a finite system with Gibbs state 
\begin_inset Formula $\rho=e^{-\beta H}/Z$
\end_inset

,
 the KMS condition follows from cyclicity of the trace.
 The time evolution automorphism is 
\begin_inset Formula $\sigma_{t}\left(B\right)=e^{iHt}Be^{-iHt}$
\end_inset

,
 so analytically continuing to imaginary time gives 
\begin_inset Formula $\sigma_{i\beta}(B)=e^{-\beta H}Be^{\beta H}$
\end_inset

 Then:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\omega\!\left(A\,\sigma_{i\beta}(B)\right)=\frac{1}{Z}\mathrm{Tr}\!\left(e^{-\beta H}A\,e^{-\beta H}B\,e^{\beta H}\right)=\frac{1}{Z}\mathrm{Tr}\!\left(A\,e^{-\beta H}B\right)
\]

\end_inset

Independently:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\omega(BA)=\frac{1}{Z}\mathrm{Tr}\!\left(e^{-\beta H}BA\right)=\frac{1}{Z}\mathrm{Tr}\!\left(A\,e^{-\beta H}B\right)
\]

\end_inset

The KMS condition is thus precisely the statement that cyclicity of trace,
 which is elementary for finite systems,
 survives as a well–defined algebraic identity in the thermodynamic limit even when 
\begin_inset Formula $Z\to\infty$
\end_inset

 and no actual 
\begin_inset Formula $\rho$
\end_inset

 exists.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It's fascinating how Claude is such a good simulacrum of intelligence.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Continuing...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

The GNS representation of a KMS state generates a 
\begin_inset Formula $\textbf{Type III}_{1}$
\end_inset

 von Neumann factor (in relativistic QFT —
 Bisognano–Wichmann theorem) or 
\begin_inset Formula $\textbf{Type II}_{1}$
\end_inset

 (in some non–relativistic cases).
 These are factors with no trace at all in the Type III case,
 or an unbounded trace in 
\begin_inset Formula $\textbf{Type II}_{\infty}$
\end_inset

 \SpecialChar allowbreak
.
 The non–sigma–finite measure is the shadow of the fact that you are in Type II or III territory,
 where the conventional density–matrix formulation is simply not available and KMS/modular theory takes over.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
The Tomita-Takesaki modular theory is precisely the machinery that handles what "density matrix" would have done,
 without requiring one to exist.
 The modular operator 
\begin_inset Formula $\Delta$
\end_inset

 encodes the non–sigma–finite structure in a canonical operator–algebraic form.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 this is all new to me.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

What does KMS stand for?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 I ask.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
Kubo–Martin–Schwinger,
 after Ryogo Kubo,
 Paul Martin,
 and Julian Schwinger.
 Kubo (1957) and Martin–Schwinger (1959) independently discovered the boundary condition on thermal Green's functions that now bears their name —
 that correlation functions in thermal equilibrium satisfy a periodicity condition in imaginary time with period 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta$
\end_inset

.
 Haag,
 Hugenholtz,
 and Winnink (1967) later recognized this as the right abstract algebraic criterion for thermal equilibrium states on 
\begin_inset Formula $C^{*}$
\end_inset

–algebras,
 freeing it from the assumption that a density matrix exists.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So OK,
 then.
 New to me.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Continuing...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
Case 3:
 Failure of 
\begin_inset Formula $\int_{U}\left\Vert c_{m}\right\Vert _{L^{2}}<\infty$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
This case has the most direct and elegant mapping to mixed states,
 via a precise integrability gap.
 The key identity is 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\Vert \left|c_{m}\right\rangle \left\langle c_{m}\right|\right\Vert _{\mathrm{trace}}=\left\Vert c_{m}\right\Vert _{H}^{2}$
\end_inset

\SpecialChar allowbreak
.
 The trace–class norm of a rank-1 projector goes as the square of the vector norm,
 not linearly.
 For finite measure spaces (including probability measures),
 Hölder's inequality forces 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}\left(\mu\right)\subset L^{1}\left(\mu\right)$
\end_inset

,
 so the density–operator condition implies the vector condition.
 The two cases collapse together.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
For infinite measure spaces,
 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}\left(\mu\right)\not\subset L^{1}\left(\mu\right)$
\end_inset

,
 and the gap is real and generic.
 A concrete example:
 take 
\begin_inset Formula $\mu$
\end_inset

 = Lebesgue measure on 
\begin_inset Formula $U=\left[1,\infty\right)$
\end_inset

,
 with 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\Vert c_{m}\right\Vert _{H}=m^{-3/4}$
\end_inset

.
 Then:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
\begin_inset Formula $\int_{1}^{\infty}m^{-3/4}=\infty$
\end_inset

 (vector integral fails)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
\begin_inset Formula $\int_{1}^{\infty}m^{-3/2}=2<\infty$
\end_inset

 (density operator integral succeeds)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
After renormalizing so 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Tr}(\rho)=1$
\end_inset

,
 you obtain a perfectly well–defined mixed state,
 with no corresponding pure–state average wavefunction.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
The physical interpretation is illuminating:
 the failure of 
\series bold

\begin_inset Formula $\int_{U}\left\Vert c_{m}\right\Vert _{L^{2}}<\infty$
\end_inset


\series default
 means there is too much total coherent amplitude to form a pure superposition —
 the integral "wants to diverge" at the level of amplitudes.
 But 
\series bold

\begin_inset Formula $\int_{U}\left\Vert c_{m}\right\Vert ^{2}<\infty$
\end_inset


\series default
 says the total intensity (probability weight) is finite,
 which is all that is needed for a statistical mixture.
 The mathematics is forcing you to describe the ensemble as a mixed state because no coherent pure–state description is available.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 ...
 Direct,
 no mincing of words.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
The Unified Picture
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
The three cases are not entirely independent.
 A cleaner way to see their common structure is through the hierarchy:
\emph default

\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\text{pure state}\in H\quad\subset\quad\text{mixed state}\in\mathcal{B}_{1}\left(H\right)\quad\subset\quad\text{KMS/algebraic state}\in\mathcal{A}^{*}
\]

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
...
 need a more general notion of state
\emph default
.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK then.
 This feels like writing poetry.
 The artistry is in writing a prompt that gives a pleasing answer.
 The above seems OK for a novice attempt.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I asked about the notation of 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{B}_{1}\left(H\right)$
\end_inset

 and got this:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
It is the Schatten 
\begin_inset Formula $p$
\end_inset

-class with 
\begin_inset Formula $p=1$
\end_inset

.
 The Schatten classes 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{B}_{p}(H)$
\end_inset

 are defined by 
\begin_inset Formula $\|T\|_{p}=\left(\mathrm{Tr}(|T|^{p})\right)^{1/p}<\infty$
\end_inset

,
 so:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{B}_{1}(H)$
\end_inset

 —
 trace–class operators (density matrices live here)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{B}_{2}(H)$
\end_inset

 —
 Hilbert–Schmidt operators
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{B}_{\infty}(H)=\mathcal{B}(H)$
\end_inset

 —
 all bounded operators
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
A density matrix is then a specific element 
\begin_inset Formula $\rho\in\mathcal{B}_{1}(H)$
\end_inset

 satisfying additionally 
\begin_inset Formula $\rho\geq0$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Tr}(\rho)=1$
\end_inset

.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I asked about the sources of uncountability in algebraic DHR.
 I'm sort of bored of copying text,
 but the answer is acceptable,
 so here's what Claude said:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
1.
 
\series bold
Infrared / Coherent Sectors (Buchholz–Fredenhagen)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
DHR morphisms require that the charge be localizable in a bounded region —
 the field creating the charge must look like the vacuum outside some compact set.
 This fails for electrically charged states in QED,
 because Gauss's law forces the electric field to extend to infinity.
 Every charged particle drags an infrared cloud of soft photons.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Buchholz and Fredenhagen generalized DHR to allow charges localized in spacelike cones rather than bounded regions.
 In this framework,
 different asymptotic photon cloud configurations —
 parameterized by classical asymptotic field data,
 which is a function space —
 give rise to sectors labeled by an element of an infinite–dimensional space.
 This is genuinely uncountable.
 The Faddeev–Kulish dressing of electron states is a concrete realization:
 the dressing function 
\begin_inset Formula $f(k)$
\end_inset

 (specifying the soft photon coherent state) ranges over an uncountable function space,
 and each inequivalent 
\begin_inset Formula $f$
\end_inset

 gives a distinct sector.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 like good poetry,
 at first this makes me feel as if I understand what is being said,
 but then on closer examination,
 I don't.
 Oh,
 wait ...
 maybe I do ...
 if the asymptotic boundary condition really is a coherent state,
 then,
 yes,
 there would indeed be uncountably many of them.
 And I guess these Faddeev–Kulish dressing sates are coherent states.
 I should read more about them.
 OK,
 that's cool,
 because the soft photons drove me nuts when I was in grad school.
 These were one of the more infuriating concepts for which no development was ever presented.
 I fucked up my career,
 didn't I?
 I should have followed my nose.
 Instead,
 I worked on things that other people told me were important.
 So it goes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

What's GNS?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 I ask:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
Gelfand–Naimark–Segal,
 after Israel Gelfand,
 Mark Naimark,
 and Irving Segal.
 The GNS construction (early 1940s–1950s) shows that any positive linear functional 
\begin_inset Formula $\omega$
\end_inset

 on a 
\begin_inset Formula $C^{*}$
\end_inset

–algebra 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{A}$
\end_inset

 canonically defines a Hilbert space 
\begin_inset Formula $H_{\omega}$
\end_inset

\SpecialChar allowbreak
,
 a representation 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi_{\omega}:\mathcal{A}\to\mathcal{B}(H_{\omega})$
\end_inset

,
 and a cyclic vector |
\begin_inset Formula $\Omega_{\omega}\rangle\in H_{\omega}$
\end_inset

\SpecialChar allowbreak
 such that 
\begin_inset Formula $\omega(A)=\langle\Omega_{\omega}|\pi_{\omega}(A)|\Omega_{\omega}\rangle$
\end_inset

 for all 
\begin_inset Formula $A\in\mathcal{A}$
\end_inset

.
 It is the fundamental theorem connecting the abstract algebraic formulation of quantum mechanics to the concrete Hilbert space formulation —
 the bridge between 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{A}^{*}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{B}(H)$
\end_inset

.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well.
 Good to know.
 I'm vaguely embarrassed that I don't know this already.
 Is that egg on my face?
 The problem with many of these topics is that without a motivating 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

why?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 my eyes glaze over.
 It's entirely possible that I skimmed over this,
 at some point,
 and didn't pay attention because I did not see the point.
 Well,
 now it's a tad more interesting.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Part of me chides myself for having wasted my life on irrelevant things.
 The other part of me acknowledges that,
 even as a child,
 I had a predilection for screwing around with stuff – playing with things,
 rather than buckling down to understand the basic,
 correct theory.
 So I spent my life playing with things,
 and only now find myself lamenting a sufficiently theoretical background.
 Oh well.
 Did I have fun yet?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Continuing with the sources of uncountable things:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
2.
 
\series bold
Broken Symmetry Vacua
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
When a continuous symmetry 
\begin_inset Formula $G$
\end_inset

 is spontaneously broken to 
\begin_inset Formula $H$
\end_inset

,
 the space of inequivalent ground states (vacuum sectors) is the coset space 
\begin_inset Formula $G/H$
\end_inset

.
 For any continuous 
\begin_inset Formula $G$
\end_inset

 this is a manifold —
 uncountable.
 Each point of 
\begin_inset Formula $G/H$
\end_inset

 gives an inequivalent,
 disjoint GNS representation of 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{A}$
\end_inset

.
 These are not related by any unitary in the quasi–local algebra.
 This is a direct consequence of Haag's theorem:
 for infinite systems,
 unitarily inequivalent representations proliferate precisely because Stone–von Neumann uniqueness fails.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 of course,
 now it becomes more urgent to understand GNS.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Continuing:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
3.
 
\series bold
KMS States as a Continuous Family
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Thermal equilibrium states at inverse temperature 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta\in(0,\infty)$
\end_inset

 give a one–parameter family of KMS states.
 For a system with a phase transition,
 the KMS state may not be unique at the critical 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta_{c}$
\end_inset

,
 giving an additional convex set of states.
 Across all 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta$
\end_inset

,
 you have an uncountable family of mutually singular states —
 each lives in a distinct sector of the GNS representation —
 parameterized by a continuous parameter.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Damn,
 duude.
 Insofar as biological nature appears to be poised at a critical phase transition – the self–organized criticality of sand piles,
 well,
 that's one heck of a phase transition to be sitting on.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here's the part that I don't get:
 the popular press and the commentariat loves to wring their hands about Bell's theorem and the many–worlds–interpretation,
 when,
 fuck it,
 if you only gave it a little bit of more thought,
 you might have something like KMS at a critical point being a plausible mechanism.
 But no one says this,
 presumably for three reasons:
 (1) its too abstract on an already abstract issue,
 and excess abstractness is makes for a poor plot.
 Popular press is all about capturing eyeballs.
 It has to be punchy,
 direct,
 entertaining.
 (2) Maybe no one ever thought of this before?
 and of course (3) it might be flat–out wrong,
 and yet another example of Linas hallucinating.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lets continue.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

4.
 
\series bold
\emph on
The Full Spectrum of 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{A}$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Even without any of the above,
 the space of all pure states on the quasi–local 
\begin_inset Formula $C^{*}$
\end_inset

–algebra 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{A}$
\end_inset

 (its Gelfand spectrum) is a compact topological space of uncountable cardinality in any interacting theory.
 The DHR superselection sectors are the physically distinguished orbits within this huge space —
 they are the sectors accessible by local operations from the vacuum.
 The uncountable full spectrum is being carved into a countable set of DHR sectors plus a vast "remainder" of sectors unreachable by local operations.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 Now say that three times,
 real fast,
 while in curved spacetime.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
So the non-separable Hilbert space 
\begin_inset Formula $H=\bigoplus_{\alpha\in A}H_{\alpha}$
\end_inset

\SpecialChar allowbreak
 with uncountable 
\begin_inset Formula $A$
\end_inset

 arises when you consider the full representation theory of 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{A}$
\end_inset

,
 or any of the physically motivated generalizations beyond strict DHR.
 The strict DHR theory itself —
 which is already the hard theorem —
 gives only countably many sectors.
 The uncountability is a feature of the larger landscape within which DHR is a well–behaved countable island.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 it certainly appears that,
 well,
 damn.
 my to–do–list got longer,
 again.
 Fuck me.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
—
-
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm starting to get confused about what it is,
 exactly,
 that I am doing here.
 I started out with a rather naive analysis of the rather old B&D textbook.
 I grew up on that textbook,
 so I'm comfortable with it.
 Familiar,
 in the family sense.
 Poking at Claude gives me a far more refined answer.
 Quite annoyingly,
 I had to spend a huge amount of time copying from Claude to here,
 and paraphrasing and editing to suit me.
 I feel like Hermione doing it,
 but I also know that if I didn't copy it,
 it would be ephemera,
 lost forever,
 and weeks or months or years later,
 I would be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

what the heck was that?
 I can't remember.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 This diary has to be a memory prosthesis.
 Reconstructing the above chat would be hard.
 I would have felt that I lost something.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So am I wiser?
 Sort of.
 I will need to look into the Faddeev–Kulish dressings;
 soft photons have long irked me.
 Faddeev seems to have been on a tear;
 between this and the ghosts,
 he clearly thought hard about asymptotic states.
 Also clearly,
 I need to understand the GNS construction well enough to be able to recite it in my sleep.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I should finish at least one job I started,
 which was about the topology of the space of operators.
 The Claude chat gets me 90% of the way;
 should go the final bit.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Then I need to sleep on this.
 Which should be easy,
 because it is now 1AM.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The meta–question is as before:
 in what respect can Unruh radiation be understood as some KMS effect or some Faddeev–Kulish dressing?
 I'm sure Claude will have some surprises in store for me.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
27 March 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This afternoons question posed to Claude is this:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
I would like to reformulate the previous discussion in terms of canonical second quantization.
 In this picture,
 the field $
\backslash
Psi$ is promoted to an operator $
\backslash
phi$ acting on a vacuum state $|0
\backslash
rangle$  such that $
\backslash
phi |0
\backslash
rangle = 
\backslash
Psi$  For a scalar field decomposed into plane waves,
 one writes $
\backslash
Psi(x,t)=
\backslash
int d^k (c(k) f_k(x,t) + c^*(k) f^*_k(x,t))$   with the $c(k)$ being complex numbers and the $f_k$ being plane waves.  The corresponding decomposition for the operator is $
\backslash
phi(x,t)=
\backslash
int d^k (c(k) a(k) f_k(x,t) + c^*(k) a^
\backslash
dagger(k) f^*_k(x,t))$ where the a and a^
\backslash
dagger are the annihilation and creation operators for a field quantum of momentum k.  It appears that some authors fold the complex amplitudes into the annihilation/creation operators,
 others do not.  Can you comment on this?
 More generally,
 in this picture of canonical second quantization,
 what is the topology of the space that the creation/annihilation operators live?
 Are there alternative representations?
 How might they work?
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 OK,
 doing physics with Claude ain't all that bad.
 I learned something new.
 Both conventions are in use;
 the convention where the 
\begin_inset Formula $c\left(k\right)$
\end_inset

 are kept explicit is necessary for the description of coherent states,
 squeezed states.
 Claude remarks that in this convention,
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the operator is state–dependent
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 which is technically correct,
 but sounds awkward:
 I was envisioning lots of operators – one per state.
 Hah.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The resolution is that I misunderstood the sense in which the field operator is an operator.
 The correct interpretation is that the 
\begin_inset Formula $a$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $a^{\dagger}$
\end_inset

 are operator–valued distributions,
 so that
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
a & :L^{2}\left(\mathbb{R}^{3}\right)\to\mathcal{F}\left(H\right)\\
a & :f\mapsto a\left(f\right)=\int d^{3}k\,a\left(k\right)f\left(k\right)
\end{align*}

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{F}\left(H\right)$
\end_inset

 is the Fock space on the (single–oscillator) Hilbert space 
\begin_inset Formula $H$
\end_inset

,
 and 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\left[a\left(f\right),a^{\dagger}\left(g\right)\right]=\left\langle f,g\right\rangle _{L^{2}\left(\mathbb{R}^{3}\right)}
\]

\end_inset

Fuck me.
 I was bone–headed.
 Forty-five years ago,
 Fock space made my eyes glaze over in boredom.
 Why?
 Because it was 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

obvious
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 nothing needed to be said or known or remembered.
 If and when it would appear in expressions,
 its meaning,
 intent and usage was clear and obvious.
 Or so it seemed.
 Thus,
 boring.
 Ten years ago,
 I wrote the current version of the Wikipedia article on the tensor algebra,
 including the bits on it being a Hopf algebra.
 I laboriously verified by hand the duality,
 the antipode,
 all that.
 I never reconnected the dots between tensor algebra and Fock space.
 I mean,
 when I wrote the Wikipedia article on the tensor algebra,
 I think I barely glanced at Fock space,
 I nodded 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

yeah right
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 my eyes glazed over again,
 and that was that.
 Time to make amends?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So let me make amends.
 Its still all obvious,
 but this time,
 worth a second glance to make sure noting is missed.
 Fock space is the tensor algebra,
 but symmetrized,
 or anti–symmetrized,
 from the get–go.
 The vector space is not finite–dimensional,
 but is (infinite–dimensional) Hilbert space.
 For the present purposes,
 that of the uncharged harmonic oscillator.
 Anything else?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 sure.
 I just thought of something wrong,
 and wrote it down,
 and then realized it was wrong,
 and erased it.
 This raises the question of the epistomolgical question of wrong thoughts.
 This has two answers.
 One is obvious and pragmatic,
 the other is vague and philosophical.
 The pragmatic approach is to do what I just did:
 oops,
 it was wrong,
 just scratch it out and continue.
 This works great for small thoughts.
 For bigger thoughts,
 they can be recorded as wrong as a caution or warning for the future:
 a lesson of what was attempted,
 and did not work out.
 For immense–sized wrong,
 one might live ones entire life without realizing it,
 or making amends.
 The more philosophical approach is to perhaps recognize this as a compute–vs–memory tradeoff.
 If I make small mistakes,
 those which I can recognize immediately,
 then the energetic costs of erasure are minimal.
 I don't have to memorize the wrong result,
 in order to recognize it in the future.
 I can forget it entirely,
 and if I ever make the same false inference,
 I will be able to recognize it easily enough,
 without consulting my list of past mistakes.
 That is,
 don't memorize,
 just recompute.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
However,
 my brain–power is limited,
 and big mistakes,
 those that took a lot of time and energy to make,
 well,
 those should be recorded and memorized.
 Why?
 Because if they took a lot of time and energy,
 that means the mistakes were non–obvious:
 investments in time and energy continued for a long time precisely because the mistake was not evident.
 It was not easy to recognize.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What is the boundary between easily–recognizable mistakes,
 and the hard–to–recognize ones?
 This boundary would appear to be defined by compute resources:
 specifically,
 the speed of thought plus size of short–term memory.
 Well,
 short–term memory is always paging long–term memory;
 to recognize my mistake,
 I had to think a bit about tensors and Hilbert spaces both,
 becfore I realized my mistake.
 I don't want to write down the mistake,
 because doing it is brain–damaging.
 It reminds me a bit of the punishment in Nil Stephenson's Anathem:
 being forced to reproduce incorrect styles of reasoning is painful and brain–damaging.
 Did Stephenson invent this out of thin air?
 Or did he pick up this idea from some prior work in epistomology?
 Some medieval scholarship,
 perhaps?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I asked google this:
 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

In Neal Stephenson's Anathem,
 there is a punishment where the protagonist has to memorize faulty arguments.
 Is there prior scholarship in epistomology for this kind of punishment,
 or analysis of wrong inference?
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and got a charming,
 diverting reply touching on sophistry,
 fallacy,
 and the mental burden of maintaining cognitive dissonance.
 LLM's as oracles are ...
 well,
 they certainly change things around.
 In the pre–LLM era of the internet,
 I would have had to search and read.
 With the LLM,
 its like ...
 going to the library,
 picking a book,
 and having it fall open to exactly the right page that provides the answer.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Shall I dig this hole any deeper?
 Clearly,
 the LLM functions as an oracle.
 Clearly,
 this is desirable,
 as long as the oracle is correct.
 Clearly,
 it is a pox,
 if one has learned to trust the oracle,
 but it has been poisoned with false beliefs (driven by political ideology,
 billionaire malfeasance.) What is the theory of faulty oracles?
 It turns into a game of espionage,
 of knowing which oracle is lying about what,
 and why,
 and countering the effect of lies.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The nature of epistomological pollution at the individual level (sophistry,
 bad faith arguments,
 pathological lying) and at the cultural level (propaganda,
 disinformation,
 marketing) has been well–studied.
 At the political level,
 it is the task of intelligence agencies.
 With the arrival of super–human oracles,
 we see that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

wrong thought
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is another scale–free phenomenon.
 Scale–free,
 because we also have deception at the biological level:
 botanical,
 even,
 with plants the deceive insects,
 never mind insects that deceive other insects.
 It would appear that this is another scale–free law:
 where–ever there is information flow,
 there is also deception.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I do not know of any mathematical studies.
 Consider,
 for example,
 mathematical logic,
 or model theory,
 or even ordinary computer science.
 Does it ever arise,
 in the study of these fields,
 that there structures that could be described as mis–leading,
 deceitful,
 or covertly mis–representational?
 Certainly,
 in number theory,
 or at least in analytic combinatorics,
 there are numerous examples of almost–identities:
 numbers that appear to be equal for thousands,
 or millions of digits,
 but are not actually equal.
 In my work with Flajolet,
 or rather,
 his work with me,
 he noted that in my untangling of the sqrt–whatever estimate of that modular form,
 I could create almost–identities to an arbitrary number of decimal places.
 That is,
 the oscillatory remainder term I found converged to zero very rapidly,
 either exponentially fast,
 or perhaps faster.
 Even better.
 Even more surprising,
 the oscillatory terms arose from the zeros of the Riemann zeta,
 and the influence of the zeros was exponentially damped.
 These zeros were responsible for the fall–off,
 and the almost–identities.
 I was suitably amazed by this,
 and actually verified this numerically – calculated some series out to the ten millionth term,
 running in high–precision,
 to some appropriate many thousands of decimal places.
 And indeed – the log slope was indeed the first Riemann zero.
 And also,
 indeed,
 the contribution of the second zero was effectively out of computational reach,
 with the compute resources I had at the time.
 Of course,
 if one can already prove identities algebraically,
 who needs to verify them numerically,
 and why?
 Hmm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Time to hit the LLM's again.
 I ask Claude:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
In the field of mathematical logic,
 one studies the syntactic and semantic structure of theories.
 In the field of model theory,
 one studies how a collection of relations and functions generate structures,
 theories and languages.
 In proof theory,
 on studies how collections of axioms and inference rules generate proofs.
 Lambda calculus is the internal language of Cartesian closed categories.
 Axiomatic set theory studies the Borel hierarchy.
 All of these fields deal with "truth" in one form or another.
 In biological nature,
 we see deception:
 flowers that deceive insects,
 insects that deceive one–another,
 but also humans the lie,
 deceive,
 generate propaganda,
 make use of dis–information,
 or just plain political marketing and psychological manipulation.
 That is,
 deceit and deception is common and scale–free in biology,
 from the smallest plants and animals,
 to the largest socio–economic structures on planet earth.
 But I cannot think of any branch of mathematics that studies this in any kind of formal setting.
 Perhaps,
 one might say,
 Kripke semantics or modal logic or something like that;
 what else might there be,
 and how deep and formal does it get?
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Claude gives a great reply.
 Sadly,
 its time to participate in the group activity of watching TV.
 And even the drinking of red wine,
 which is a rather unusual event.
 Later.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Synopsis:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL)
\series default
 developed by Plaza,
 Gerbrandy,
 and significantly extended by van Benthem,
 van Ditmarsch,
 Kooi,
 and van Eijck,
 studies how epistemic states change through actions —
 announcements,
 observations,
 private communications,
 and crucially,
 lying.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Formalities:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
a Kripke model 
\begin_inset Formula $M=(W,R_{1},\ldots,R_{n},V)$
\end_inset

 where 
\begin_inset Formula $R_{i}$
\end_inset

 is agent 
\begin_inset Formula $i$
\end_inset

's accessibility relation (worlds they can't distinguish),
 and you define update models that transform 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

 into 
\begin_inset Formula $M\otimes U$
\end_inset

 via a *product update* operation.
 A **public announcement** 
\begin_inset Formula $!φ$
\end_inset

 eliminates worlds where 
\begin_inset Formula $φ$
\end_inset

 is false.
 But a **lying announcement** —
 formally,
 announcing 
\begin_inset Formula $φ$
\end_inset

 while believing 
\begin_inset Formula $¬φ$
\end_inset

 —
 is also definable:
 it's an action 
\begin_inset Formula $\daggerφ$
\end_inset

 whose precondition is 
\begin_inset Formula $B_{i}¬φ$
\end_inset

 (the speaker believes 
\begin_inset Formula $φ$
\end_inset

 is false) and whose effect is that listeners update as if 
\begin_inset Formula $φ$
\end_inset

 were true,
 while the speaker's beliefs remain unchanged.
 Van Ditmarsch has papers specifically on "lying" and "misleading" as first-class operations with distinct formal semantics.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Then:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
These have distinct proof–theoretic and model–theoretic properties.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 What?
 What does this mean?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm not sure what the point of copying the reply into this diary is.
 I'm experimenting.
 I like the reply.
 Perhaps I will remember it better if I take the time to copy it?
 Its a Hermione thing to do.
 It's an interesting model.
 I suppose it's worth running the game–theoretic simulations.
 Maybe.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Part of the point of analytic combinatorics is to develop analytic formulas that explain things,
 as opposed to be forever reliant on simulations.
 But simulations are necessarily experimental and exploratory in nature:
 the theorist can all to easily miss behaviors exposed only in simulations.
 The two go together.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 lets take this seriously,
 then:
 if experimentation and theory are dual,
 to what degree can we raise this to a formal,
 mathematical duality?
 I guess it is OK to say that theoretians discover semantic statements,
 while experimentalists obtain syntactic truths?
 I suppose I should enquire about this too.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Wait,
 there's more:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
Belief Revision (AGM Theory)
\series default
 Alchourrón,
 Gärdenfors,
 and Makinson (1985) gave an axiomatic theory of how a rational agent updates a belief set 
\begin_inset Formula $K$
\end_inset

 upon receiving new information 
\begin_inset Formula $φ$
\end_inset

.
 The operations are:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Expansion:
 
\begin_inset Formula $K+φ$
\end_inset

 (just add it)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Revision:
 
\begin_inset Formula $K*φ$
\end_inset

 (add 
\begin_inset Formula $φ$
\end_inset

,
 restore consistency)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Contraction:
 
\begin_inset Formula $K÷φ$
\end_inset

 (remove 
\begin_inset Formula $φ$
\end_inset

,
 minimal change)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
The Levi identity connects revision and contraction.
 The Grove sphere semantics gives a possible–worlds model.
 Now:
 deception is simply the injection of false information into a revision process.
 AGM itself doesn't model the source's intent,
 but the formal machinery cleanly separates the epistemic state (what the agent believes) from the informational input (what they are told),
 making deception formally tractable.
 Extensions like iterated belief revision (Darwiche–Pearl) and social belief revision (how groups of agents update under peer pressure or propaganda) are active research areas.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I like the idea of not modeling the source's intent.
 In biology,
 driven by Darwinian evolution,
 asking for the intent of evolution seems a perennially losing proposition:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

survival of the fittest
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is the classical catch–phrase,
 while the dynamical–systems language might be more along the lines of systems that do not evaporate or disappear after some passage of time.
 The non–dissipative systems.
 There's no 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

intent
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in this view.
 Asking what the intent of a plant was to deceive some insect just won't cut it.
 Even humans rarely know why they do the things they do.
 Of course,
 many human actions are intentional.
 But this deserves a separate theory.
 When I row a rowing shell,
 I intend to make every stroke perfect,
 and work hard,
 strive to do so.
 This is intentional.
 But why do I row?
 Oh,
 that is a much harder question.
 I intend to attend rowing practice.
 I tell myself it is good for my health.
 I do feel much better when I am in shape.
 My biological body releases endorphins:
 evolution has found a way to make me desire to be healthy.
 What was the intent of evolution?
 For me to survive.
 Well,
 for humans to survive,
 and this requires the discovery of mechanisms that cause organisms to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

want to
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 stay healthy and reproduce.
 I want to have sex.
 Darwin made me want it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So that's the reductionist scientific bridge:
 symplectic geometry makes for a distinction between conservative,
 ergodic systems,
 and dissipative regions of space.
 Hand–wave up through bio–chemistry and into autopoesis to biological organisms,
 which employ energy gradients to grow in complexity.
 Well,
 even as Axel Kleidon describes,
 this is even the case for rivers,
 the water cycle,
 rock erosion and even geothermal systems driven by the energy gradient of Earths hot core,
 and the cooler mantle,
 then crust.
 Volcanos are fractal for a reason:
 they exploit the energy gradient.
 Biology encapsulates such cycles behind barriers:
 the cell membrane.
 The cell membrane forms a kind of event horizon:
 certain events in the cell never get out,
 or are rather,
 so shielded and isolated from the environment that they have negligibly small direct effect on the external world.
 All this despite being in the causal light cone.
 So,
 this is kind of the anti–IIT – the anti–integrated–information theory.
 The causitive network that has been intentionally cut.
 This is the basic building block of espionage and deceit:
 the ability to hide.
 The thing that is hidden is now called the secret.
 Cell walls provide that boundary between in and out;
 the metabolism of a prokaryote is ...
 a secret?
 Well,
 no;
 here,
 the boundary protects the internal mechanisms from decay and washing out,
 dissolving into the ocean.
 But when a sugar molecule crosses the event horizon of the cell wall,
 to be tortured and dismembered in that internal prison,
 its pent up energy used to power further cellular activities...
 I know that I am pushing this analogy too far,
 but it is the barriers to power,
 and the control of financial resources that keep the IRGC in power in Iran,
 controlling a reticent population.
 There's an operational mechanism there,
 built out of humans,
 that survives,
 endures,
 and does not dissipate.
 The point here is that membranes and enclosures,
 inside and outside,
 are not only fundamental to the survival of the insides when faced with disturbances acting from the outside,
 but that this mechanism is scale–free,
 scaling from prokaryotes to social structures.
 And again,
 scale–free systems are symptomatic of (second–order) critical points:
 self–organizing systems driving to criticality,
 such as Per Bak's Abelian sandpile.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But I've said all this before,
 in this diary.
 Why say it again?
 Because it is so fantastic,
 that I marvel at the vista.
 Because it is so encompassing,
 I cannot figure out how to grasp it,
 work with it,
 theorize with it,
 experiment with it.
 Of course,
 I suppose I could create some experimental petri dish of Kripke agents playing game–theoretic games with one another.
 Or some AGM belief–update systems that don't have a reason for what they do,
 they just do it.
 I could try to axiomatize and write down a category–theoretic framework for agents behind walls – and then ask what the internal language of this category of agents is.
 Perhaps that language might be the so–called 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

membrane computing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 (look it up in Wikipedia)?
 Surely,
 assorted rigorous results are possible.
 Even perhaps analytic results,
 in the flavor of Flajolet's Analytic Combinatorics?
 And what of it?
 What would happen if I expended the effort to develop and expose and prune this agentic model of chemical reality?
 How should I spend my time?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I keep coming back to scale–free phenomena,
 and self–organized criticality as my shibolleth.
 These seem to be the pronounced,
 revealed truths.
 But then I also leave these ideas dormant and fallow:
 I've not really bothered to figure out the agentic category,
 or to rewrite the production rules of membrane computing to have a more jigsaw and less Chomskian form.
 I mean,
 that could actually be interesting.
 But there are so many things to do ...
 so many perfectly viable scientific pursuits – viable,
 at least,
 in an earlier century.
 Now,
 its everything,
 everywhere,
 all at once.
 Maybe I'm teeing up for my next shot?
 I'm currently lost in the depths of quantum,
 which I shall return to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

real soon now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Continuing with deception.
 Claude mentions the 2007 Nobel Prize – Myerson,
 Maskin,
 Hurwicz in social choice theory,
 and the non–existence of deception–free mechanisms in non–dictatorial settings when there are three or more choices.
 Blah,
 blah,
 blah,
 Nash equilibrium.
 I don't know why,
 exactly,
 but my eyes glaze over with disinterest when I hear the words 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Nash equilibrium
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 See?
 There *are* things I'm not particularly interested in.
 Claude also throws in crypto for good measure – zero–knowledge proofs,
 commitment schemes,
 Byzantine fault tolerance.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Claude,
 in it's summary,
 once again tells what a genius I am,
 this time without urging me to enroll in special ed.
 Funny how it is that I'm ignorant of physics – the topic in which I have my PhD – but I'm so insightful everywhere else.
 Well,
 either that,
 or Claude is once again up to it's old tricks.
 Here we go:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
Formal Gaps and What Doesn't Exist
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
What's genuinely absent,
 and what makes your observation sharp,
 is:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate

\series bold
\emph on
No unified categorical or algebraic treatment of deception
\series default
 as a morphism or functor.
 Model theory has Ehrenfeucht–Fraïssé games;
 there's no analogous "deception game" formalism with the same depth.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate

\series bold
\emph on
Scalability across levels
\series default
:
 you observe correctly that deception is scale–free in biology —
 from mimicry to geopolitics.
 The formal tools above are level–specific:
 DEL handles small agent groups,
 game theory handles strategic rational agents,
 network models handle population–level misinformation spread (SIR–like epidemiological models on graphs),
 but there's no framework that coherently connects all scales.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate

\series bold
\emph on
No proof theory of deception
\series default
:
 there's no analog to sequent calculus or natural deduction where "a false derivation" is a first–class syntactic object,
 separate from "an incorrect derivation."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate

\series bold
\emph on
Intentionality is hard
\series default
:
 deception requires *intent*,
 which is a mental–state concept.
 Formal logic can model *beliefs* (via Kripke) and *actions that cause false beliefs* (via DEL),
 but *intent to deceive* requires a higher–order epistemic operator:
 
\begin_inset Formula $B_{i}$
\end_inset

 (action causes 
\begin_inset Formula $B_{j}φ∧¬φ$
\end_inset

) —
 and the nesting of self–referential intentional states gets complicated fast.
 This sits at the boundary of what Kripke semantics handles cleanly.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Why,
 thank your Claude!
 So I guess I am able to pose questions that gaze upon virgin mathematical territory.
 Well,
 not like this is hard:
 virgin mathematical territory is everywhere.
 It is tempting to say that this is due to sociological,
 political and economic reasons.
 But it would also be true that even if we spent 50% of our GDP pursuing mathematics,
 there would still be virgin mathematical territory within easy arms reach.
 Why is that?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
That is perhaps yet another deep philosophical question,
 although this one is perhaps to deep even for me.
 Can I relate the abundant surface of mathematical possibilities to the fractal nature of the Borel hierarchy?
 At each level,
 we expose infinite new vistas of possibilities,
 again vast and breathtaking.
 At each level,
 we can sink arbitrary amounts of non–equilibrium energy flows to pursue ergodic,
 space–filling quests for mathematical truths,
 and,
 as each level is more infinite than the last,
 the game appears to be unbounded.
 At least until we bump into the Church–Kleene cardinal,
 and then there's trouble.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Math is like candy in a candy store:
 each aisle promises even greater delights than the aisle one is in.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In conclusion,
 Claude performs a mind–reading trick.
 Of course,
 like any good mind reader,
 I unwittingly revealed my secrets with my prompt,
 which is why Claude can do this.
 This is the reverse of crypto,
 it is the unwitting disclosure of secrets,
 the leakage through the membrane and into the causal cone.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

What Would a Deep Theory Look Like?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
One could imagine a unified framework combining:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
A topos–theoretic or sheaf–theoretic foundation for truth (where truth is local/contextual,
 as in Lawvere–Tierney topologies —
 where subobject classifiers naturally model partial and contextual truth)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
Coalgebraic modal logic for the dynamics (since coalgebras are the natural semantics for Kripke frames and their generalizations)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
Game semantics (Abramsky–Jagadeesan) for the interactive verification structure
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
An information–theoretic layer measuring the damage done by deception
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
This doesn't fully exist.
 It's a genuine open area at the intersection of logic,
 game theory,
 and formal epistemology.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Very good.
 I'll add this to my to–do list.
 I'll have to do some juggling to fit it in;
 my current to–do list is long enough to keep me busy for a few thousand life–times.
 Top of the list is going to sleep before 1AM.
 Might be hard to pull off.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh.
 Well,
 of course,
 this is where Claude shows it's weakness.
 Yes,
 it is definitely using some of th important buzzwords in this game of buzzword bingo.
 Perhaps subobject classifiers show up,
 but that could hardly be central.
 Far more interesting is the idea of co–algebraic modal logic.
 The co–algebra for tensor algebra is the Hopf algebra (err,
 well 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the whole thing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is the Hopf algebra).
 Once again,
 the internal language of this co–algebraic model logic will be something similar to,
 or identical to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

membrane computing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 (seriously,
 look it up.) I understand how to do comultiplication in the tensor category.
 I do see how splitting things across a membrane boundary resembles co–multiplication:
 building a world–model inside the membrane is somehow 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

clearly
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 co–multiplicative.
 Articulating the algebra of this would certainly be a worthy project.
 Screw game semantics;
 I'm not interested in that.
 That's just Claude throwing in the kitchen sink.
 The last bullet,
 however – that sounds like some search for the holy grail.
 Imagine if we had a tool to measure the damage done by deception.
 How transformative this would be to economics and politics (and social choice theory,
 I suppose – suppose my 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

social choices
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 were to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

maximize capitalist production
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

minimize damage from deception
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

provide a less turbulent chart into the unknown,
 one that does not threaten human extinction
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 (this catch–all includes global warming and existential risk from e.g.
 AI.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
That last is again the autopeotic,
 evolutionary driver of energy gradient flows.
 Put ourselves behind a cell wall,
 join a clade,
 say,
 the neo–Victorians of the young ladies primer,
 and try to protect against nuclear blasts.
 See?
 Round and round we go,
 on the mental merry–go–round.
 I think that's a symptom of mental illness,
 right?
 Recurring,
 repetitive,
 intrusive thoughts?
 The wordcels delight,
 the shape–rotators torment.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
28 March 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 lets get back to Fock space before we do Kripke.
 I'm reading Wikipedia now.
 May as well do the conscientious notes.
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathcal{F}_{\pm}=\overline{\bigoplus_{n=0}^{\infty}S_{\pm}H^{\otimes n}}
\]

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $S_{\pm}$
\end_inset

 is the symmetrizer or anti–symmetrizer and the overline means closure.
 Closure means that for 
\begin_inset Formula $\left|\Psi\right\rangle \in\mathcal{F}$
\end_inset

 that 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\Vert \left|\Psi\right\rangle \right\Vert ^{2}<\infty$
\end_inset

 This need for finite norm has implications for soft states,
 limiting them to the form of coherent states.
 I wonder if ideas from Hardy spaces are applied by mathematicians when they study coherent states.
 I suppose I should make a short side–trip there,
 it will be needed for the Faddeev–Kulish thing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I wonder what the space of automorphisms of Segal–Bargmann space is.
 I asked Claude.
 The answer is entirely unexpected.
 I'll paraphrase.
 The space of unitary xforms is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

too large
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 it does not preserve analytic or algebraic structure.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ah fuck me.
 I kind of mostly don't want to copy the answers,
 but if I don't copy them,
 they evaporate.
 They evaporate from my mind,
 from existence.
 As I was sleeping last night,
 I was imagining the space of all mathematical truths/expressions as a fractal,
 and I realized it had to be a space–filling fractal.
 Not only could there be two different numbers that match to an arbitrary number of decimal places,
 but this filigree of algebraic almost–relations is dense,
 the way the rationals are dense.
 Mathematical theorems form loops spaces,
 where the loops are homotopic deformations of proof sequences.
 This space becomes solid as it fills in.
 I imagined that here–and–now is the space of possibilities,
 filling in.
 Of course this doesn't make sense,
 not really.
 I was dreaming.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So,
 again ...
 what exists?
 When I ask Claude a question,
 well,
 really what I do is run a high–dimensional vector through some weight matrices,
 and when I close that tab,
 that vector is gone,
 for good,
 forever.
 This bits have been erased.
 What remains is my dim memory of what I read on that web page,
 and that disappears,
 when I die.
 That erasure is almost nearly absolute.
 Now,
 to display those pixels on my screen,
 some electrons did flow,
 and they did throw off some EM field,
 some photons.
 These photons promptly thermalize into the walls of the house,
 into Earth's atmosphere,
 and this thermal space is truly large:
 X raised to the avogadros number where 
\begin_inset Formula $X$
\end_inset

 is some infinite–dimensional Hilbert space.
 This thermal trace is sky–rocketingly small,
 far beyond any reasonable cutoff beyond which there would be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

new physics
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 and so again,
 what exists?
 What remains after I close a browser tab?
 This is a question that irks me.
 One of many irksome,
 vexing questions.
 And,
 perhaps like the medieval alchemist,
 I sit here,
 wasting my time trying to convert lead into gold,
 but what else should I be wasting my time on?
 Fast women and slow ships?
 Painful as it is,
 I will once again copy Claude's answer to here,
 as it is the only effective memory prosthesis that I have at my disposal.
 It's not fast,
 its not efficient,
 but its the best I've got.
 Why do I complain?
 Four hundred years ago,
 this would have been done with pen and ink.
 Claude is an oracle,
 and I will have to wait for a better memory prosthesis to show.
 (well,
 or I could write some software.
 Not this week,
 though.).
 So here we go:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
Automorphisms Preserving the Holomorphic Structure
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
The physically and mathematically meaningful automorphisms are those preserving the complex structure —
 i.e.,
 biholomorphic isometries.
 The biholomorphic automorphisms of 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{C}^{n}$
\end_inset

 are affine maps 
\begin_inset Formula $z\mapsto Az+b$
\end_inset

.
 The subset preserving the Segal–Bargmann inner product are precisely the affine symplectic maps,
 forming the Jacobi group (also called the oscillator group):
 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
G^{J}=\mathrm{Sp}(2n,\mathbb{R})\ltimes H_{2n+1}
\]

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $H_{2n+1}$
\end_inset

 is the Heisenberg–Weyl group of phase–space translations.
 Its action on 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{F}^{2}$
\end_inset

 gives:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
Heisenberg–Weyl part:
 displacement operators 
\begin_inset Formula $D(\alpha)=e^{\alpha a^{\dagger}-\bar{\alpha}a}$
\end_inset

,
 implementing 
\begin_inset Formula $f(z)\mapsto e^{\alpha z-|\alpha|^{2}/2}f(z-\alpha)$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
Symplectic part:
 the metaplectic representation 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Mp}(2n,\mathbb{R})$
\end_inset

 (the double cover of 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Sp}(2n,\mathbb{R})$
\end_inset

),
 implementing Bogoliubov transformations
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 Well,
 I've seen this before,
 maybe a decade ago or more,
 and it sort of went in one ear and out the other.
 Seems to be direct and obvious enough;
 it does not make my imagination light up.
 Of course,
 I have the sneaking suspicion that I will have to very carefully internalize this,
 as it will be required in order to articulate the algebraic structure of Unruh radiation.
 Probably.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And this again leads to the question of what the point of it all is.
 When I say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

master and internalize,
 so that I can articulate
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 I picture mental gymnastics,
 in a very direct and non–pejorative sense:
 I'll be doing one–handed pullups and cartwheels and backflips,
 because I will be magically strong enough to do so.
 And ....
 ?
 Because it is fun.
 Is this a good use of my time?
 When tropical birds strut and display,
 it is to attract a mate;
 or more mechanistically,
 the attraction of mates enables the dynamical system coalesced around DNA and ribosomes to continue forwards in time,
 as a stable,
 breathing,
 living structure.
 My mental gymnastics hardly attracts the opposite sex,
 but I do it anyway,
 out of compunction.
 I am compelled.
 The christian terminology is to say I have a calling.
 Shall I continue with the mental gymnastics?
 Yes.
 But I reserve the right to wonder just quite why.
 Yes,
 the energy gradient of the mitochondria in my neurons runs on automatic,
 keeping me alive.
 No living creature drops dead;
 this is a self–perpetuating process.
 But in the ozone of the noosphere,
 there is a vast tract to explore;
 why explore this,
 and not that?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Am I being neurotic?
 Last summer,
 I read half of a stage–play written by this Lithuanian woman,
 an acquaintance made in Santara–Šviesa in Vilnius.
 OMG it was painfully neurotic.
 Something about some spurned love,
 and the agony.
 The neuroses was unbearable.
 I read half,
 I could not finish it.
 My mind raced,
 I wanted to write in this diary.
 I wanted to visit her,
 and slap her on the face,
 and say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

snap out of it
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Should I slap myself on the face,
 and pronounce 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

snap out of it?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 I guess I am fated to copy more of Claude's replies into this diary,
 and I should resign myself to that fate.
 Give up hope.
 Accept my station in life.
 Grow the fuck up,
 be an adult.
 This is as good as it gets.
 Seize the day.
 Veni vidi vici.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
Automorphisms of the Weyl (CCR) Algebra
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Every automorphism of the Weyl 
\begin_inset Formula $C^{*}$
\end_inset

–algebra 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{W}$
\end_inset

 takes the form 
\begin_inset Formula $\alpha:W(f)\mapsto e^{i\theta(f)}W(Sf)$
\end_inset

 where 
\begin_inset Formula $S$
\end_inset

 is a symplectic map on the one–particle space 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}(\mathbb{R}^{n})$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\theta:L^{2}\to\mathbb{R}$
\end_inset

 is a measurable phase cocycle satisfying 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\theta(f+g)-\theta(f)-\theta(g)=\tfrac{1}{2}\,\mathrm{Im}\langle f,g\rangle\pmod{2\pi}
\]

\end_inset

So 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Aut}(\mathcal{W})\cong\mathrm{Sp}(L^{2})\ltimes\hat{L}^{2}$
\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $\hat{L}^{2}$
\end_inset

 denotes the group of such cocycles.
 This is an enormous group,
 most of which is not unitarily implementable on the standard Fock representation.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 What is a symplectic map on L^2?
 Oh.
 It's any map 
\begin_inset Formula $S$
\end_inset

 for which 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathrm{Im}\langle Sf,Sg\rangle=\mathrm{Im}\langle f,g\rangle
\]

\end_inset

because 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Im}\langle\cdot,\cdot\rangle$
\end_inset

 is a symplectic form on 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}$
\end_inset

:
 it is anti–symmetric 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Im}\langle f,g\rangle=-\mathrm{Im}\langle g,f\rangle$
\end_inset

,
 it is non–degenerate,
 and it is real–linear.
 Huh.
 How is it I never knew/noticed this before?
 What was I not paying attention to?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The CCR is then 
\begin_inset Formula $\left[a\left(f\right),a^{\dagger}\left(g\right)\right]=\langle f,g\rangle$
\end_inset

 and in the Weyl form 
\begin_inset Formula $W\left(f\right)W\left(g\right)=e^{-i\,\mathrm{Im}\langle f,g\rangle/2}W\left(f+g\right)$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Note every unitary map is symplectic:
 viz 
\begin_inset Formula $\langle Uf,Ug\rangle=\langle f,g\rangle$
\end_inset

 automatically;
 but not vice–versa;
 the symplectic maps do not have to preserve the real part.
 The symplectic group is a supset of the unitary group.
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathrm{Sp}\left(L^{2}\right)\supset U\left(L^{2}\right)\supset O\left(L^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

The extra freedom corresponds to the Bogoliubov transforms:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
Sa\left(f\right)S^{-1}=a\left(uf\right)+a^{\dagger}\left(vf\right)
\]

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $S$
\end_inset

 decomposes into linear and antilinear parts:
 
\begin_inset Formula $S=A+B$
\end_inset

 with 
\begin_inset Formula $A\left(\lambda f\right)=\lambda A\left(f\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $B\left(\lambda f\right)=\overline{\lambda}B\left(f\right)$
\end_inset

.
 Explicitly,
 
\begin_inset Formula $A\left(f\right)=\left(S\left(f\right)-iS\left(if\right)\right)/2$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $B\left(f\right)=\left(S\left(f\right)+iS\left(if\right)\right)/2$
\end_inset

 and 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
29 March 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We interrupt this broadcast for an important announcement.
 The fiber–bundle idea is wrong.
 Its gloriously and completely wrong.
 I am utterly flabbergasted.
 OMG.
 This is obvious and stupid and trivial,
 how could I not have seen it before?
 I have an excuse.
 I will tell you my excuse,
 shortly.
 But,
 first,
 an explanation of what's wrong,
 and why its wrong.
 (I don't yet understand what is the right answer,
 but the vision of what's wrong is clear.
 And again,
 it came to me as I was snoozing early in the morning.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
You won't believe what happened next...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This one weird trick ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is subtle,
 so listen up.
 I will say a bunch of really obvious things,
 so this will sound like you've heard it all before.
 I heard it all before.
 I never realized what it meant.
 Lets see if I can find all the right words for this ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So ...
 when one has a field – a vector field,
 a scalar field – on a manifold – on can rather naturally envision a vector field as some flow – wind blowing around,
 combing the arrows of the vector field.
 A scalar field is even easier – a height field – some rolling hills.
 Well,
 now imagine a vector bundle or line bundle – this is just as easy.
 Its now a stack of sections,
 one piled on another,
 like pages in a book.
 Alternately,
 one can think of actual fibers:
 given an atlas,
 the fiber bundle is locally a cartesian product:
 
\begin_inset Formula $\left.E\right|_{U}\cong F\times\left.B\right|_{U}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi^{-1}\left(x\right)=E_{x}\cong F$
\end_inset

 with connections on 
\begin_inset Formula $U_{a}\cap U_{b}$
\end_inset

 and consistency conditions on 
\begin_inset Formula $U_{a}\cap U_{b}\cap U_{c}$
\end_inset

 and this all feels entirely normal and what else could it be?
 We,
 well,
 I don't know about you,
 but I was certainly lead to think this way,
 because,
 well,
 you know,
 SU(2) and SU(3) and color charges and Yang–Mills.
 Nobel prize stuff.
 You learn it.
 You don't re–examine it,
 or ask 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

what if
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 At least,
 I didn't.
 Don't.
 I mean,
 fiber bundles are pervasive.
 We get Riemann surfaces.
 We get spinor bundles.
 Who would ever think twice when obviously 
\begin_inset Formula $\pi^{-1}\left(x\right)\cong F$
\end_inset

 because,
 duhh.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Heh.
 But this is wrong.
 All wrong.
 It's a blind–fold that prevents one from seeing the truth.
 And what's the truth?
 Well,
 there's also this other truth,
 that Huygens points out.
 That Fresnel and Fraunhoffer and Airy explore.
 That Feynmann distills and condenses into a walloping–strong spirit.
 These waves – this collection of waves – scalar waves – this collection forms a space.
 And we kind of want waves that are continuous,
 differentiable,
 and some even insist on smoothness,
 because why not?
 And since we all know about topology and convergence,
 and well,
 Cauchy explains what it means to converge,
 and these desirable properties of continuity and differentiability don't hold if we don't insist on uniform convergence.
 The Sobolev space thing,
 for example.
 Although,
 for physics,
 the Hilbert space is more desirable and proven and has withstood the test of time for over a century of quantum mechanics.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So here's the thing:
 Hilbert space is not a fiber bundle.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
That's it.
 That's the secret.
 That's the great revelation.
 Of course,
 its,
 uhh,
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

obvious
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Stupid,
 even.
 No one said it was.
 Right?
 No one said that,
 right?
 So those SU(3) color charges and the Yang–Mills action,
 they're,
 what?
 They're chopped liver?
 Fuck me.
 They're chopped liver.
 Yes.
 Damn right.
 I read that book by David Bleecker:
 Gauge Fields and Variational Principles and I understood all of it (and OK I skimmed the proofs in the middle) and you get to the last page,
 the very last sentence,
 and its a gut punch:
 "So we beat on,
 boats against the current,
 borne back ceaselessly into the past." Oh,
 wait,
 wrong book.
 Its more like this:
 (paraphrasing) 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

This book only covers the classical theory,
 and I don't really know what the quantum theory for any of this would be.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Wow.
 That's a gut–punch.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The whole point of comedy is that a joke should never need an explanation.
 Unless you're stupid,
 and don't get the joke.
 Apparently,
 I'm stupid.
 I didn't get the joke.
 Maybe I was daydreaming in class that day.
 Or I skimmed that part of the chapter.
 The gauge fields and fibers provide the correct geometric description of the classical action:
 the Hamilton–Jacobi equations that result from variational principles that minimize geodesics on the fiber bundles and give us decompositions into vertical and horizontal bundles,
 and the connections that solder all of it together,
 torsion–free as a general desire or convention.
 This is all ...
 classical.
 It's not quantized.
 There are no Hilbert spaces here.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For the special introductory low,
 low price of $59.99,
 you'll receive this:
 a statement that quantum theory is done with Hilbert spaces.
 Holy fuck.
 A Hilbert space is a vector space,
 not a fiber bundle.
 This is a trivial and trite observation,
 so wtf?
 The only thing that is fibrous about it is that when working with the QCD lagrangian,
 or the QED Lagrangian,
 there's a certain collection of geometrical consistency conditions to be imposed on that Hilbert space:
 conditions that just so happen to involve fibers over a base space.
 The mental complexity of having to master gauge fields occludes the fact that the fundamental structure is a Hilbert space,
 and that Hilbert space is NOT a fiber bundle!
 Full stop.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What this means,
 specifically,
 for me,
 for this text,
 most of what I wrote previously – last week – its all misleading whenever it isn't outright wrong.
 Oww.
 I am not going to go back and edit those old diary entries,
 to pick apart the salt from the pepper,
 to pick out what's right from what's wrong.
 I've already written about truth and misunderstanding.
 A topic worth revisiting,
 but not now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
With this new,
 uhh 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

insight
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 I think it is now safe to go back and think about the scalar field some more.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And,
 with that,
 a re-re-re-review of the super–basics of something like 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}\left(M\right)$
\end_inset

 for some,
 uhhh,
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

space
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

.
 I almost wrote 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

manifold
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 but right now,
 it is not clear to me that the definition of 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}\left(M\right)$
\end_inset

 requires that 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

 be an actual manifold,
 with an atlas and all that.
 I don't think a metric is needed.
 I think it's enough for it to be affine.
 It's popular to say the word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

conformal
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 so I'll say it too,
 but that hardly seems needed.
 I will ask Claude later on what the minimal requirements are for 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

 before 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}\left(M\right)$
\end_inset

 can be defined on it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For the Hilbert space itself,
 all we really need is a complete set of basis vectors.
 It's OK to put the cart before the horse when defining completeness:
 the basis must allow for sequences that converge to any (cough,
 cough,
 ahem) square–integrable function.
 By 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

any
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 we mean 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

every
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 That's all.
 So really,
 the only condition on the space 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

 is that it should be possible to define integration on it.
 I've been trained to believe that integration requires a sigma–algebra,
 and a non–negative measure on that algebra.
 I don't know if this can be loosened or relaxed in some way.
 Normally,
 one has Polish spaces.
 Or normal spaces.
 Or something.
 I don't recall.
 Something convenient is often requested.
 The basis doesn't have to be plane–waves:
 any linear combo of plane–waves will do,
 and there are some truly wild–and–crazy linear combos one can entertain.
 The flat–space convention is that the basis vectors are *also* energy eigenstates.
 This becomes problematic when the arrow of time is befuddled by acceleration and curvature.
 So energy eigenstates are convenient,
 but are not fundamental.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We will return to our regular programming shortly.
 The other early–morning insight–dream was that since
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathrm{Sp}\left(L^{2}\right)\supset U\left(L^{2}\right)
\]

\end_inset

perhaps the correct identification is that here–and–now is isomorphic to 
\begin_inset Formula $U\left(L^{2}\right)$
\end_inset

 which would explain why here–and–now is many–worlds–ish.
 But since Unruh is due to a Bogoliubov xform,
 and the gravitational field near my feet is stronger than that near my head,
 maybe this is the way that Penrose is right about wave–function collapse being driven by gravitation.
 Perhaps somehow,
 in some way,
 the 
\begin_inset Formula $U\left(L^{2}\right)$
\end_inset

 has to be deformed to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

keep up
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 but since its somehow non–deformable,
 the attempt to bend it as time sweeps by causes the wave–functions to collapse.
 That is,
 the WF collapse is the result of trying to bend 
\begin_inset Formula $U\left(L^{2}\right)$
\end_inset

 in a way that it cannot go.
 So that's my current best hypothesis.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are several work items.
 The first is easy:
 in order to have a Hilbert space 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}\left(M\right)$
\end_inset

,
 what axioms must 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

 satisfy?
 The next few questions are a lot harder.
 How much can 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

 be (continuously) varied without altering 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}\left(M\right)$
\end_inset

?
 Is it possible to define a deformation of 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}\left(M\right)$
\end_inset

,
 and to what degree might such a deformation have a back–reaction on 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

?
 Then,
 is it possible to have a deformation of 
\begin_inset Formula $U\left(L^{2}\right)$
\end_inset

 and if not then why not?
 Would such a deformation also force 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}$
\end_inset

 to change,
 and could such changes induce dynamics on 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

?
 More generally,
 how does one go about making deformations?
 Is there a general recipe,
 or do I have to get inventive and lucky?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How does one deform vector spaces?
 Well,
 for Lie algebras,
 (Lie groups) we found a way.
 Them–there are the affine Lie algebras,
 and the Poincare invariance gives you the bosonic and fermionic strings.
 And there have been vast amounts of ink spilled on that.
 Can any of this be re–purposed to bend a Hilbert space?
 To mash it around and flop it inside a symplectic space?
 Probably unworkable in practice,
 but inspirational and motivational.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Yesterday,
 I was going to write down Bogoliubov in detail,
 but interruptions ...
 interruptions.
 I need to finish that.
 If this was a paper,
 I could pick up where I left off,
 but as a diary,
 I don't want to edit old entries ...
 cause when I do,
 they end up being non–sequiters.
 So I'll have to splat here in diary–order,
 and maybe if I ever find anything meaningful and worthwhile,
 I can cut–n–paste from here to a more formal paper.
 My chances of turning the above into something meaningful remain mighty slim.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Anyway,
 I've got about 15 minutes to kill,
 so lets see what Claude has to say.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The question:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
Hilbert spaces of square–integrable functions.
 Suppose I have some space M.
 I wish to work with functions $M
\backslash
to 
\backslash
mathbb{C}$ of functions from M to the complex numbers,
 and then define a Hilbert space out of these functions:
 that is,
 the space of square–integrable functions on M.
 What is the minimal set of axioms that the space M must satisfy,
 for this to be possible?
 Naively speaking,
 to define square–integrability,
 it seems that integrability is needed,
 and for that,
 M needs to be endowed a Borel algebra,
 and a non–negative,
 sigma–additive measure on that algebra.
 Can the requirement for a sigma algebra be loosened?
 I assume that M does not need to be a manifold,
 or does it?
 I assume that M does not need a metric,
 or does it?
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The reply.
 As always,
 its compelling enough that I copy here for completeness.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
Can the σ–algebra be weakened?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
The countability in the σ–algebra axiom is not merely convenient —
 it is load–bearing for completeness.
 The proof that L² is a Hilbert space (not just a pre–Hilbert space) requires completeness,
 i.e.,
 every Cauchy sequence converges.
 The standard proof (Riesz–Fischer) goes:
 Given a Cauchy sequence {fₙ},
 extract a subsequence with ‖fₙₖ₊₁ − fₙₖ‖ < 2⁻ᵏ,
 define g = Σₖ |fₙₖ₊₁ − fₙₖ|,
 show g ∈ L² via Monotone Convergence (which requires σ–additivity),
 conclude the series converges a.e.
 and in L².
 Without σ–additivity (countable additivity),
 monotone convergence fails,
 and L² need not be complete.
 With only a finitely additive measure on an algebra of sets,
 you get a pre–Hilbert space whose completion would require an external argument.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 As suspected.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
There is an axiomatization that avoids σ–algebras as the starting point:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\series bold
\emph on
The Daniell–Stone Approach
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Instead of axiomatizing the domain (sets),
 you axiomatize the integral directly.
 You postulate:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
A vector lattice L ⊆ {f:
 M → ℝ} of "elementary" integrable functions,
 closed under ∧ and ∨
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
A positive linear functional I:
 L → ℝ (the proto–integral) The Stone condition:
 if fₙ ↓ 0 pointwise in L,
 then I(fₙ) → 0
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
From these,
 one constructs the full L² theory without ever explicitly writing down a σ–algebra.
 The σ–algebra of measurable sets emerges as a theorem.
 So the σ–algebra requirement is not so much dropped as it is derived rather than postulated.
 This is a logically cleaner foundation in some contexts (e.g.,
 when you have a natural space of test functions but no obvious σ–algebra).
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK,
 that's cool.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Now for something that trips me up,
 and I don't know how to capture it in words.
 Let me try.
 The lab frame of here–and–now,
 as I sit in this kitchen,
 is manifestly 3-real-spatial dimensions.
 So this makes me want to say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

oh,
 well this space 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

 must have tangent spaces that are 3D and that's that,
 everything is as it's always been
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Yet as I look out the window and see a twinkling star some light–years distant,
 this too is a part of here–and–now,
 so somehow,
 causal structure seems to be a part of it.
 So,
 wait,
 no;
 its 3D plus extra stuff.
 But the full causal cone is not needed;
 only the light–like parts?
 Or maybe instead,
 its just 3D plus an explicit photon field (quantized of course) but w.f.
 collapse means only the on–shell photons and close–to–on–shell matter?
 What's built in,
 and what's emergent?
 Of course,
 traditional QFT is 4D minkowski and light is a field,
 but that is somehow insufficient to explain here–and–now.
 So I am imagining that here–and–now is in fact just/only 
\begin_inset Formula $U\left(L^{2}\right)$
\end_inset

 but 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}$
\end_inset

 on what 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

?
 Maybe its just ...3D but maybe its something else;
 I just don't know.
 If we just say 4D we're back to the Standard Model,
 and that's the beaten path I'm trying to get off of.
 So ...
 what's 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

?
 What axioms does 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

 have to satisfy?
 Well,
 the answer is sharply minimal:
 a sigma algebra.
 Or less,
 if the Daniell–Stone approach is taken.
 But such minimal structure is too minimal.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 that's it.
 I've burned up another day;
 or rather,
 real–life means I cannot prattle away 16 hours a day on this.
 Alas.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
30 March 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Catch some minutes.
 Where were we?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let 
\begin_inset Formula $M$
\end_inset

 be some space,
 any space endowed with a sigma algebra and measure 
\begin_inset Formula $\mu$
\end_inset

.
 Let 
\begin_inset Formula $F$
\end_inset

 be the set of maps 
\begin_inset Formula $M\to\mathbb{C}$
\end_inset

 and define an inner product 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\langle f,g\right\rangle =\int_{M}d\mu\,\overline{f}g$
\end_inset

 and then let 
\begin_inset Formula $H\subset F$
\end_inset

 consisting of 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\langle f,g\right\rangle <\infty$
\end_inset

 so that 
\begin_inset Formula $H$
\end_inset

 is a Hilbert space,
 and given the definition of the inner product,
 
\begin_inset Formula $H=L^{2}\left(M\right)$
\end_inset

.
 For the present task,
 though,
 we don't really need the measure space;
 we just need a Hilbert space and an inner product.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So perhaps,
 let 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}$
\end_inset

 be any Hilbert space having a complex–valued inner product;
 the only necessary ingredient is that 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\langle f,g\right\rangle \in\mathbb{C}$
\end_inset

.
 This is required,
 so as to allow 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Im}\langle f,g\rangle$
\end_inset

 to be interpreted as a symplectic form.
 As noted earlier,
 it is anti–symmetric 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Im}\langle f,g\rangle=-\mathrm{Im}\langle g,f\rangle$
\end_inset

,
 it is non–degenerate,
 and it is linear in the right arg:
 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Im}\langle f,\lambda g\rangle=\lambda\mathrm{Im}\langle f,g\rangle$
\end_inset

 and anti–linear in the left 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Im}\langle\lambda f,g\rangle=\overline{\lambda}\mathrm{Im}\langle f,g\rangle$
\end_inset

 and so overall,
 its real–linear when restricted to 
\begin_inset Formula $\lambda\in\mathbb{R}$
\end_inset

.
 The real–linear property is sufficient for it to be a symplectic product.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A symplectic map 
\begin_inset Formula $S:H\to H$
\end_inset

 is any real–linear map 
\begin_inset Formula $S$
\end_inset

 for which 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathrm{Im}\langle Sf,Sg\rangle=\mathrm{Im}\langle f,g\rangle
\]

\end_inset

Denote the set of all such maps as 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Sp}\left(H\right)$
\end_inset

.
 There is a subset 
\begin_inset Formula $U\left(H\right)\subset\mathrm{Sp}\left(H\right)$
\end_inset

 of unitary maps,
 defined as 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\langle Uf,Ug\rangle=\langle f,g\rangle
\]

\end_inset

The symplectic maps can be decomposed into linear and anti–linear parts
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
Sf=Uf+Af
\]

\end_inset

with 
\begin_inset Formula $U\left(\lambda f\right)=\lambda Uf$
\end_inset

 whereas 
\begin_inset Formula $A\left(\lambda f\right)=\overline{\lambda}Af$
\end_inset

 and specifically 
\begin_inset Formula $A\left(if\right)=-iAf$
\end_inset

.
 These are given explicitly as 
\begin_inset Formula $Uf=\frac{1}{2}\left(Sf-iS\left(if\right)\right)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $Af=\frac{1}{2}\left(Sf+iS\left(if\right)\right)$
\end_inset

 and for 
\begin_inset Formula $f=\alpha+i\beta$
\end_inset

 with 
\begin_inset Formula $\alpha,\beta$
\end_inset

 real,
 then 
\begin_inset Formula $U\left(\alpha+i\beta\right)=U\alpha+iU\beta$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $A\left(\alpha+i\beta\right)=A\alpha-iA\beta$
\end_inset

 and so 
\begin_inset Formula $Af=\overline{Af}$
\end_inset

.
 Bleekh.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The anti–linear 
\begin_inset Formula $A$
\end_inset

 is annoying,
 so write instead 
\begin_inset Formula $V=\overline{A}$
\end_inset

 and so 
\begin_inset Formula $V\left(\lambda f\right)=\lambda Vf$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $V\overline{f}=\overline{Vf}$
\end_inset

 which is just like 
\begin_inset Formula $U\overline{f}=\overline{Uf}$
\end_inset

 so both parts are linear,
 and the decomposition is written as
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
Sf=Uf+\overline{Vf}
\]

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The upshot of the above is that we can define symplectic operators on *any* Hilbert space with a complex–valued inner product.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Crapsicle.
 I want to write the below but the dots aren't connecting for me:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The CCR is 
\begin_inset Formula $\left[a\left(f\right),a^{\dagger}\left(g\right)\right]=\langle f,g\rangle$
\end_inset

 The Bogoliubov transforms are:
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
Sa\left(f\right)S^{-1}=a\left(Uf\right)+a^{\dagger}\left(Vf\right)
\]

\end_inset

and the Bogoliuov conditions are
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
UU^{\dagger}-VV^{\dagger} & =I\\
UV^{T}-VU^{T} & =0
\end{align*}

\end_inset

I'm a dolt.
 So I ask Claude and it says something along the lines of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

oh,
 it's Shale's theorem (1962)
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 which is apparently defines 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\mathrm{Sp_{Restricted}}\left(H\right)=\left\{ S\in\mathrm{Sp}\left(H\right):\left\langle Vf,Vf\right\rangle <\infty\right\} 
\]

\end_inset

and the condition 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\langle Vf,Vf\right\rangle <\infty$
\end_inset

 is called the Shale condition.
 This condition has multiple implications:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
It implies that 
\begin_inset Formula $V$
\end_inset

 is small enough to be Hilbert–Schmidt,
 which means that the Bogoliubov xform is small enough to be implemented in the same Fock space.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
When 
\begin_inset Formula $V$
\end_inset

 does not meet this condition,
 then Bogoliubov maps between inequivalent Fock spaces.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Apparently,
 the original statement of Shale's thm was that when the condition is met,
 then 
\begin_inset Formula $S$
\end_inset

 has a unitary representation on Segal–Bargmann space.
 This is if and only if,
 necessary and sufficient.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm dazed and confused,
 now.
 What are the minimum conditions needed to have a CCR?
 Well,
 I guess we need only to have a Weyl algebra.
 Now,
 a Weyl algebra is just a Clifford algebra on any vector space that posses a symplectic form.
 But this is getting circular,
 because 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Im}\langle f,g\rangle$
\end_inset

 is a symplectic product,
 and thus,
 given a tensor algebra 
\begin_inset Formula $TV$
\end_inset

 on *any* complex vector space 
\begin_inset Formula $V$
\end_inset

 we can build a Clifford algebra on it;
 the symmetric sector being Fock space aka 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

bosons
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and the anti–symmetric part allowing spinors to be constructed via the Clifford algebra.
 So this is generic:
 given any complex vector space 
\begin_inset Formula $V$
\end_inset

 this provides a formula to build CCR on it (via the tensor algebra aka Fock space).
 Not only that,
 but I have a generic way of building inequivalent representations;
 these appear when Shale's condition is violated.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The above construction requires no Hamiltonians,
 no positions or momenta,
 no symplectic manifolds,
 and not even manifolds of any kind.
 It does require a complex vector space with a complex inner–product.
 And that's all.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 But I continue to be befuddled.
 The above construction allows the operators 
\begin_inset Formula $a$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $a^{\dagger}$
\end_inset

 to be defined,
 and so a Hamiltonian does appear:
 its 
\begin_inset Formula $H=a^{\dagger}a$
\end_inset

.
 So now we have a hamiltonian appear out of thin air.
 I'm now even more confused.
 Does this imply that the Hamiltonian is a Casimir operator (in the sense of PBW?) Entirely remarkable how this all appears out of thin air.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My Claude subscription has run out,
 I no longer get it for free.
 I need to renew and get a cheaper version and then I have to pose it all of the above paragraphs to sanity check my thinking.
 Anyway,
 good night.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh.
 One more thought.
 The basis–dependence of things is also remarkable.
 For large vector spaces,
 e.g.
 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}\left(\mathbb{R}^{3}\right)$
\end_inset

 there are various ways of writing basis functions,
 with plane–waves being canonical.
 But here,
 the Hamiltonian stratifies the space into different energy levels.
 In the non–interacting case,
 this foliates the vector space,
 with one foliation per wave–vector.
 I guess this is generic.
 Generic in that if I have a manifold,
 then well,
 whatever,
 one can built the cotangent manifold,
 and the symplectomorphisms all just happen automatically.
 Fuck me.
 I read all those texts on differential topology,
 which I've complextely forgotten.
 In my mind,
 I envision Poincare duality as a kind of generalized Fourier transform.
 So that tells me that this foliation can be constructed whenever ...
 whenever some or another invariant vanishes,
 whenever this is no obstruction.
 And conversely,
 when foliations do not exist,
 that means the system,
 taken as a dynamical system,
 is ergodic.
 My reach wildly exceeds my grasp.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The other confusion is that ...
 if I have a Hamiltonian,
 this 
\begin_inset Formula $H=a^{\dagger}a$
\end_inset

 that appears out of thin air,
 then can I use this to induce a time coordinate,
 by applying some duality principle?
 Some Poisson bracket?
 That this is the fashion by which time arises?
 And if there's time,
 doesn't that mean that there is a dynamical system,
 that appears in there,
 somewhere,
 out of thin air?
 Oof.
 This is like a fever dream.
 Simply confirming or denying the above is a multi–month project.
 Even with Claude doing the algebra,
 its still months of work.
 I suppose.
 Or longer.
 Good night,
 for sure this time.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
31 March 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 Amazingly,
 Anthropic seems not to provide any records of monthly usage ...
 something that any other utility does provide ...
 nor does it offer a way of downgrading plans.
 This might get rocky.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here's another question:
 What fields 
\begin_inset Formula $K$
\end_inset

 have conjugate elements?
 Google AI says basically 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Galois theory with an involution
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Are there any fields that do not fit neatly into Galois theory?
 Yes.
 Four cases.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Non–normal extensions (not all roots of polynomial appear,
 e.g.
 extension by 
\begin_inset Formula $\sqrt[3]{2}$
\end_inset

)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Inseperable extensions.
 Typically finite fields or function fields over finite fields.
 e.g.
 for the field of rational functions 
\begin_inset Formula $F_{p}\left(t\right)$
\end_inset

 the polynomial 
\begin_inset Formula $x^{p}-t$
\end_inset

 has only one root.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Transcendental extensions.
 Example 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{Q}\left(\pi\right)$
\end_inset

.
 Conventional Galois theory encompasses only algebraic extensions.
 The appropriate framework is called 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

transcendence bases
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Wow.
 All my work on the beta expansion – a stack of questions now fly to mind.
 I dunno.
 Maybe they're all shallow questions,
 ...
 but I'd found finite orbits of various kinds ...
 I wonder if ...
 Well,
 there remain many open questions about the beta expansion,
 but the reality is it is hard to pose these questions,
 until enough research has been done to clarify the nature of the question in the first place.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Infinite extensions.
 i.e.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Infinite Galois theory
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Requires imposing the Krull topology.
 Wikipedia redirects to profinite groups,
 listing profinite integers as a canonical example.
 This in turn invokes the p–adics ...
 and again,
 there's a lot there to to get lost in.
 I'll resist that temptation for now.
 Maybe one day I will be senile,
 and then return to it in wonder.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let's return to the topic at hand.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
1 April 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Time flies like a banana.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The vector space does not have to be over the complex numbers;
 any field with an involution should do:
 so for 
\begin_inset Formula $k\in K$
\end_inset

 and marking the involution as 
\begin_inset Formula $\overline{k}$
\end_inset

 then one has 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

real
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 
\begin_inset Formula $k+\overline{k}\in K$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

imaginary
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 parts 
\begin_inset Formula $k-\overline{k}\in K$
\end_inset

.
 Then any vector 
\begin_inset Formula $\sum_{n}k_{n}e_{n}$
\end_inset

 over a set of basis elements 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\{ e_{n}\right\} $
\end_inset

 can be decomposed into 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

real
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

imaginary
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 parts 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\sum_{n}k_{n}e_{n}=\sum_{n}\frac{k_{n}+\overline{k}_{n}}{2}e_{n}+\sum_{n}\frac{k_{n}-\overline{k}_{n}}{2}e_{n}
\]

\end_inset

At this point,
 disclaimers about fields of characteristic 2,
 and other oddball cases apply.
 There are also interesting cases where there may be more than one (non–trivial) involution.
 More generally,
 questions about constructions involving the automorphism group come up.
 This might be worth looking at later(?).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Pick some element (any element) 
\begin_inset Formula $k\in K$
\end_inset

 then define 
\begin_inset Formula $w=k-\overline{k}$
\end_inset

 then this 
\begin_inset Formula $w$
\end_inset

 is skew–symmetric:
 
\begin_inset Formula $\overline{w}=-w$
\end_inset

.
 Well,
 but then I need the field to be a quadratic extension,
 and blah blah blah,
 and more exceptions,
 asterisks and qualifications,
 so I don't see the point.
 Lets stick to 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{C}$
\end_inset

 to keep things easy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this case,
 split a complex vector space into real and imaginary parts,
 then double up each of the basis vectors to get a real vector space of twice the size:
 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\sum_{n}c_{n}e_{n}=\sum x_{n}e_{n}+\sum_{n}y_{n}\left(ie_{n}\right)
\]

\end_inset

then define 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{n}^{\left(q\right)}=e_{n}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{n}^{\left(p\right)}=ie_{n}$
\end_inset

 so that it's now a real vector space with basis 
\begin_inset Formula $\left\{ e_{n}^{\left(q\right)},e_{n}^{\left(p\right)}\right\} $
\end_inset

.
 Define 
\begin_inset Formula $TV$
\end_inset

 as the tensor algebra.
 Impose an equivalence relation 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{n}^{\left(q\right)}\otimes e_{n}^{\left(p\right)}-e_{n}^{\left(p\right)}\otimes e_{n}^{\left(q\right)}=1$
\end_inset

,
 build the ideal 
\begin_inset Formula $I$
\end_inset

 out of that,
 then the symplectic Clifford algebra 
\begin_inset Formula $TV_{\mathbb{R}}/I$
\end_inset

 is the Weyl algebra.
 (I'm writing 
\begin_inset Formula $V_{\mathbb{R}}$
\end_inset

 for the real vector space that has 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

forgotten
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 its a complex vector space.
 Forgetful functor,
 etc.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This construction should work for suitable fields that have skew–symmetric imaginary elements.
 The interesting cases are where the field has more than one non–trivial involution.
 Another case arises when the field has some interesting automorphism group;
 how might the above construction generalize to that?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Continuing ...
 define 
\begin_inset Formula $a_{n}=\left(e_{n}^{\left(q\right)}-e_{n}^{\left(p\right)}\right)/\sqrt{2}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $a_{n}^{\dagger}=\left(e_{n}^{\left(q\right)}+e_{n}^{\left(p\right)}\right)/\sqrt{2}$
\end_inset

 from which we conclude
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
a_{n}\otimes a_{n}^{\dagger}-a_{n}^{\dagger}\otimes a_{n}=1
\]

\end_inset

Note that there is no imaginary 
\begin_inset Formula $i$
\end_inset

 in the expressions above;
 it was already absorbed into the definition of 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{n}^{\left(p\right)}$
\end_inset

 so as to keep the vector space real.
 The use of the 
\begin_inset Formula $\dagger$
\end_inset

 symbol here is also perhaps misleading or confusing;
 it is meant to be neither 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

complex
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 conjugate,
 nor transpose;
 instead its just a distinguishing mark,
 to distinguish the two 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

conjugates
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The symbol 
\begin_inset Formula $\dagger$
\end_inset

 can be elevated to a bona–fide map on the entire space by defining 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{n}^{\left(q\right)\dagger}=e_{n}^{\left(q\right)}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $e_{n}^{\left(p\right)\dagger}=-e_{n}^{\left(p\right)}$
\end_inset

.
 This is a definition,
 and not an inference,
 because we'd previously forgotten the complex structure,
 and now need to define it back in.
 By the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

free lemma
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 the 
\begin_inset Formula $\dagger$
\end_inset

 map extends 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

freely
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 to the entire vector space 
\begin_inset Formula $V_{\mathbb{R}}$
\end_inset

 and to the tensor algebra 
\begin_inset Formula $TV_{\mathbb{R}}$
\end_inset

 and to the Weyl algebra 
\begin_inset Formula $TV_{\mathbb{R}}/I$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Since the complex structure was forgotten,
 we also have to define the symplectic map 
\begin_inset Formula $J:e_{n}^{\left(q\right)}\mapsto e_{n}^{\left(p\right)}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $J:e_{n}^{\left(p\right)}\mapsto-e_{n}^{\left(q\right)}$
\end_inset

 and again,
 by the free lemma,
 this freely extends to the tensor and Weyl algebras.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
With a little extra hand–waving,
 I guess this can be repackaged into an antisymmetric bilinear form,
 but I don't see the need for this just yet.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A change of basis then allows the Bogoliubov trick to pass through.
 If the dimension of the vector space is finite,
 then the Shale condition means that,
 after a symplectic transform,
 the result can continue to live in the same Fock space.
 Thus,
 it seems that the only way to to get inequivalent,
 uhh,
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

vacua
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is to have a basis that is at least countable.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are several things here that trip me up,
 that I don't understand.
 When working with a field 
\begin_inset Formula $K$
\end_inset

 that was a quadratic extension,
 we built the skew–symmetric element 
\begin_inset Formula $w=k_{0}-\overline{k_{0}}$
\end_inset

 after selecting a distinguished element 
\begin_inset Formula $k_{0}\in K$
\end_inset

 and in general,
 
\begin_inset Formula $w^{2}\ne-1$
\end_inset

 because if it was,
 we would have an 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

effectively real
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 field.
 So,
 for the construction to pass through,
 we would need to track where 
\begin_inset Formula $w$
\end_inset

 goes.
 I'm too lazy to do that;
 however,
 it seems that something along the lines of 
\begin_inset Formula $a_{n}=\left(we_{n}^{\left(q\right)}-e_{n}^{\left(p\right)}\right)/\sqrt{2}$
\end_inset

 or something like that would be needed.
 What's remarkable about this expression is the notational resemblance between the skew–symmetric element 
\begin_inset Formula $w$
\end_inset

 and the frequency 
\begin_inset Formula $\omega$
\end_inset

 of the simple harmonic oscillator.
 It would seem that there is some sort of analogy here that can be pushed.
 Even weirder,
 I can hallucinate some sort of profinite–like construction,
 with 
\begin_inset Formula $\bigoplus_{k_{0}\in K}a_{w}$
\end_inset

 for the field case,
 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\bigoplus_{\omega\in\mathbb{R}^{+}}a\left(\omega\right)$
\end_inset

 for the harmonic oscillators.
 I don't have the time in the day to figure out if this is an insane idea,
 or if its a good idea.
 Woe is me.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I did ask Claude;
 it tells me that the case of any quadratic extension of 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}$
\end_inset

 or of the 
\begin_inset Formula $p$
\end_inset

–adics 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{Q}_{p}$
\end_inset

 was explored by Volovich and Vladimirov;
 this is the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\begin_inset Formula $p$
\end_inset

–adic QM
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 The case of the quaternions is developed by Adler et al.
 and goes by 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

quaternionic QM
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I asked about notation,
 and Claude says 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

sure thing,
 boss
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Given quadratic extension 
\begin_inset Formula $K=\mathbb{R}\left(\sqrt{-d}\right)$
\end_inset

 for some 
\begin_inset Formula $d>0$
\end_inset

 and picking 
\begin_inset Formula $k_{0}=\sqrt{-d}$
\end_inset

 gives 
\begin_inset Formula $w=2\sqrt{-d}$
\end_inset

 and then it blargle–bungles some algebra but it does make some interesting remarks:
 the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

norm form
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 of a quadratic extension is 
\begin_inset Formula $N\left(q+wp\right)=\left(q+wp\right)\left(q-wp\right)=q^{2}-w^{2}p^{2}$
\end_inset

 which is effectively the SHO Hamiltonian.
 Then 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
the SHO is,
 at its algebraic core,
 the theory of a quadratic extension of 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}$
\end_inset


\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
The ladder operators are the irreducible elements of 
\begin_inset Formula $K$
\end_inset

 viewed as a two–dimensional real algebra
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Well,
 OK then.
 Claude proceeds very confidently,
 so I challenge it:
 does this appear in some textbook or paper.
 Well,
 blow me down,
 here's the reply:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

The statement "the SHO is the theory of a quadratic extension of 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}$
\end_inset

" was my own synthesis,
 connecting:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
The standard metaplectic/symplectic literature
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
The algebraic theory of involutions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
Your observation about 
\begin_inset Formula $w=k-\sigma(k)$
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
It is the kind of statement that,
 once made,
 seems obvious and inevitable —
 but I cannot point you to a paper or textbook that states it in precisely those terms.
 It may exist somewhere in the mathematical physics literature that I am not recalling,
 or it may be genuinely a observation that falls between the fields and has not been written up explicitly.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So it's obvious but no one bothered to note it before.
 Perhaps that is because it's too trivial t mess with.
 whatever.
 After more prodding and poking,
 some notable remarks:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The SHO lives in real symplectic space;
 the compatible complex structure is given by 
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{align*}
J_{\omega}: & e_{q}\mapsto\frac{1}{\omega}e_{p}\\
 & e_{p}\mapsto-\omega e_{q}
\end{align*}

\end_inset

so that 
\begin_inset Formula $J^{2}=-1$
\end_inset

.
 Then 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
Different values of 
\begin_inset Formula $\omega$
\end_inset

 give different but equivalent complex structures on the same real symplectic space,
 related by a symplectic transformation (specifically,
 a squeeze).
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Next,
 it reminds me of this:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
The Metaplectic/Oscillator Representation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
The deeper formalization goes through the Segal–Shale–Weil (or oscillator) representation.
 The group 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Sp}(2,\mathbb{R})=\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb{R})$
\end_inset

 acts on the phase plane,
 and the metaplectic group 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Mp}(2,\mathbb{R})$
\end_inset

 acts on 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}(\mathbb{R})$
\end_inset

 by the oscillator representation.
 The different SHO frequencies correspond to the orbit of the standard complex structure under the action of the diagonal subgroup:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\begin{pmatrix}\sqrt{\omega} & 0\\
0 & 1/\sqrt{\omega}
\end{pmatrix}\in\mathrm{Sp}(2,\mathbb{R})
\]

\end_inset

which sends 
\begin_inset Formula $(q,p)\mapsto(\sqrt{\omega}\,q,\,p/\sqrt{\omega})$
\end_inset

 and thereby transforms 
\begin_inset Formula $a_{\omega=1}$
\end_inset

\SpecialChar allowbreak
 to 
\begin_inset Formula $a_{\omega}$
\end_inset

\SpecialChar allowbreak
.
 So all SHO frequencies are in the same 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Sp}(2,\mathbb{R})$
\end_inset

 orbit —
 they are all equivalent up to a symplectic (squeeze) transformation.
 The different values of 
\begin_inset Formula $\omega$
\end_inset

 label points in the Siegel upper half–plane 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathfrak{H}=\mathrm{Sp}(2,\mathbb{R})/U(1)$
\end_inset

,
 which parameterizes compatible complex structures on 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{R}^{2}$
\end_inset

.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Claude is quite the wordcel.
 It would take me a fair bit of work and effort to come up with wording that conformed to this canonical expository style.
 This reminds me of the idea of phrasebooks for writing Latin in the style of Cicero.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I challenge Claude about the fact that 
\begin_inset Formula $\omega$
\end_inset

 is real and the Siegal upper half–plane is 2D.
 I get back some blargle about squeezed states:
 viz,
 for 
\begin_inset Formula $z=x+iy\in\mathfrak{H}$
\end_inset

 write 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
a_{z}=\frac{1}{\sqrt{2y}}\left(\overline{z}e_{q}+ie_{p}\right)
\]

\end_inset

so that 
\begin_inset Formula $y$
\end_inset

 corresponds to the frequency and the 
\begin_inset Formula $x$
\end_inset

 corresponds to the squeezing angle.
 Claude snuck in an extra factor of 
\begin_inset Formula $i$
\end_inset

 while I wasn't looking.
 The stuff about squeezed states is interesting,
 but wanders afield from my original path.
 I have enough distractions,
 for now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The reason that it's
\emph on
 
\emph default

\begin_inset Formula $\mathfrak{H}=\mathrm{Sp}(2,\mathbb{R})/U(1)$
\end_inset

 is that earlier,
 we noted that 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Sp}\supset U$
\end_inset

 and so we mod out the unitary xforms to get 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathfrak{H}$
\end_inset

 as what's left.
 The U(1) xforms are just an overall phase 
\begin_inset Formula $a\mapsto e^{i\theta}a$
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
References:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Folland's "Harmonic Analysis in Phase Space" (1989) covers complex structures on symplectic spaces,
 the Siegel upper half-plane,
 and ladder operators.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The Segal–Shale–Weil oscillator representation and 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Sp}(2n,\mathbb{R})$
\end_inset

 is Howe,
 "Quantum mechanics and partial differential equations" (1980)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 there are still a few lacunae in the story above,
 but we've got enough to move forward.
 (The lacuna include the detailed map for symplectic xforms inducing Bogoliubov xforms,
 and moving from the general TV/I to the even subset:
 the symmetrized Fock space.
 A formal exposition needs to spell this out without the Claude blargle and algebraic errors.) So:
 to summarize (again) for any complex vector space,
 we can forget the complex structure,
 give it a real symplectic structure instead,
 and construct the ladder operators.
 This construction does not require any inner products on the vector space,
 nor any symplectic forms,
 nor does it require any sigma algebras or measures.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The next step revolves around the representation theory.
 This needs a compatible inner product,
 and from before,
 it seems that a measure space is sufficient to provide that.
 At this point,
 I should probably stop writing,
 and read Folland's Harmonic Analysis instead.
 I also need to review Faddeev's soft photons and the relationship to the Shale condition.
 Part of me suggests that I should rework this diary into a somewhat more organized review.
 Part of me says,
 no,
 that's a distraction.
 But I need something more organized because the current state of affairs is mildly disjointed and has gaps in the algebra.
 Hmm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fuck me.
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oscillator_representation is stunningly long.
 After a quick scroll,
 my heart sinks.
 Its like – I've been over all this material before.
 Mostly,
 more or less.
 Yet,
 on the other hand,
 its lost in the fog of time,
 and I should really review it.
 Will I be excited and interested,
 or will it be some overwhelming barrage of semi–important details I've long forgotten?
 Some years ago,
 I overhauled the Wikipedia article for 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

capacitance of a set
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 At first,
 I'm thinking,
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

gee what is this?
 Sounds interesting!
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and after a short sprint,
 my heart sinks – 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

oh,
 this is just the formal math setting for the concept of capacitance from electrodynamics
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 something I'd covered as an undergrad.
 I did finish cleaning it up.
 It was vaguely interesting to be reminded that,
 in 2D,
 the Green's function is a logarithm.
 Cause Laplacian,
 and all that.
 It was easy enough to see how this would/should generalize to generic Riemannian spaces.
 Its a a specific,
 simple subset of generic harmonic analysis.
 Which I should study more,
 because I'm pretty sure I now understand enough to do my PhD thesis correctly,
 this time,
 by correctly quantizing the axial anomaly.
 And that unfinished side–journey into Majorana that I never fully completed.
 Well,
 that's for later.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Tonight,
 I have to finish fixing mom's computer.
 Crap.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But first,
 some more open questions:
 So,
 I got the explanation that one subset of the symplectic xforms map oscillators of different frequencies to one–another.
 These need to be connected back to Lorentz xforms.
 Going in the other direction gives me the squeezed states,
 but the detailed articulation to Bogoliubov remains undone.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 I'm still rolling,
 can't quit yet...
 For the 
\begin_inset Formula $n$
\end_inset

–dimensional complex vector space,
 we forget the complex structure to get a 
\begin_inset Formula $2n$
\end_inset

–dimensional real symplectic space.
 The symplectic xforms are now 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathrm{Sp}\left(2n,\mathbb{R}\right)$
\end_inset

 and the unitary subspace is 
\begin_inset Formula $U\left(n\right)$
\end_inset

 and the Siegel half–space is 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathfrak{H_{n}}=\mathrm{Sp}\left(2n,\mathbb{R}\right)/U\left(n\right)$
\end_inset

 and the Bogoliubov xforms are 
\begin_inset Formula $n\left(n+1\right)$
\end_inset

 real parameters.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For a vector field in 3D,
 we have 
\begin_inset Formula $n=3$
\end_inset

...
 I'm a lazy turd,
 so I ask Claude ...
 and Claude is a fucking moron.
 It makes up some blargle about 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

isospin squeezed states
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 So I push on this,
 and get a nice reply,
 verbatim below:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
What Is Solidly Established
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
Squeezed states in heavy–ion collisions is a genuine research area.
 The key observable is Hanbury Brown–Twiss (HBT) interferometry —
 two–pion correlations in momentum space.
 The connection to squeezing was made explicitly by:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
Yuen (1976) and subsequently Walls and Milburn established the general squeezed state formalism in quantum optics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
Aichelin and Bertsch (1985) and others applied two–particle correlations to heavy–ion physics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
Andreev,
 Betman,
 and Siemens —
 and more explicitly Sinyukov and collaborators in the 1990s —
 noted that the pion source in heavy–ion collisions could produce squeezed coherent states.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
The most explicit connection between squeezed pion states and HBT correlations was developed by:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
Agarwal and collaborators
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
Cernigoi,
 Fabbri and others in the Italian school
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\emph on
Most explicitly:
 M.
 Asakawa,
 T.
 Csörgő,
 and M.
 Gyulassy —
 "Little Bang Squeezed Pion States" —
 who argued that back–to–back pion correlations (as opposed to same–direction HBT correlations) are a direct signature of squeezed vacuum states produced in the quark–gluon plasma
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\series bold
\emph on
The Back–to–Back Correlation Signature
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
This is the most concrete physical prediction.
 A squeezed vacuum at fixed 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbf{k}$
\end_inset

 generates correlations between modes 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbf{k}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $-\mathbf{k}$
\end_inset

 —
 exactly the off–diagonal Bogoliubov structure we identified.
 This produces an enhancement in the back–to–back pion pair distribution:
 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
C(\mathbf{k},-\mathbf{k})=1+\left|\frac{\langle a(\mathbf{k})a(-\mathbf{k})\rangle}{\langle a^{\dagger}(\mathbf{k})a(\mathbf{k})\rangle}\right|^{2}>1
\]

\end_inset

This is distinct from the usual HBT effect which correlates 
\begin_inset Formula $(\mathbf{k},\mathbf{k})$
\end_inset

 pairs.
 The back–to–back signal is a direct quantum signature of the Bogoliubov mixing of the vacuum.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 this is kind of fun!
 I could search social media for years before I got something this nice.
 I suppose a subscription to Physics Today would offer this level of satisfaction,
 maybe.
 But you know me.
 Ain't gonna happen.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I need Claude to explain Hanbury–Brown–Twiss for me.
 Every time I sit down to read about it,
 I get vaguely lost and confused.
 Perhaps it is time to put an end to that?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Clearly,
 my to–do list remains out of control.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
2 April 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Spent the day goofing off.
 I did write a Wikipedia comment that perhaps 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the past is some outer model of some large cardinal axioms
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 and it occurred to me that this would obviously be challenged,
 and so needs a proof.
 But the proof is easy;
 it goes as follows.
 Physics describes what we know about the universe (and physics is mathematical).
 Everything else is a union of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

unknown physics
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

maybe something more
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 The 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

unknown physics
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is clearly mathematical (by definition).
 The 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

maybe something more
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is either mathematics,
 or it isn't.
 If it isn't,
 then it's God,
 machine elves,
 or space aliens from Atlantis.
 If it is mathematics,
 then it needs to be big enough to contain 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

everything
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 and so has to be in the von Neumann Universe,
 presumably with outer models of large cardinals.
 QED.
 Note that both Cantor and Frank Tippler think the von Neumann Universe *is* God.
 Note that the above 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

proof
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is non–constructive,
 as it makes use of the law of the excluded middle,
 and if you don't like this,
 then take a run at the Borel hierarchy and see how far you can go.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This proof seems silly,
 because no non–mathematician will understand it,
 and many mathematicians will claim that its abusive or spurious.
 But really,
 I don't see anything else – there is this intuitive feel of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

God of the gaps
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 but this word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

gaps
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 has a distinctly set–theoretic feel.
 If God is in the gaps,
 then reality is dense in God;
 but the notion of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

dense
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 has both a formal mathematical definition,
 but also an informal semantics that is suggested or evoked by the formal definition.
 Words like 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

semantics
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

evoke
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 are also very puffy and vague,
 but that is due to our lack of knowledge;
 the platonic form is presumably still there.
 At any rate,
 it is pointless for me to write more,
 as it will expose me as a mediocre philosopher.
 The best I can hope for here is to spend a few days reading philosophy,
 and then assemble lists of points and counter–points.
 This benefits no one,
 no thing.
 Enough.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
17 April 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Time is precious.
 Spent the last two weeks doing genealogy.
 I want to get back to the project above,
 but not today.
 There are still other distractions.
 For example,
 I am sitting in the dentists office right now,
 waiting for my mom.
 Her molars hurt.
 We will find out.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Three nights ago,
 as I fell asleep,
 and on waking,
 I had some very inspired thoughts on the nature of reality.
 I had planned to write them up that day,
 but never got the chance.
 I will try to reconstruct now,
 but sadly,
 these have faded.
 We shall see.
 These were philosophical in nature,
 and of course,
 hallucinatory,
 as such half–wakeful states then to be.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There were two.
 The second was on the tip of my tongue just now,
 and slipped away as I started to review what I needed to write.
 The first one was shallower,
 and so perhaps easier to dispense with.
 Well,
 they are both inter–related.
 What is the universe trying to maximize?
 Happiness.
 Some scrambling:
 by convention,
 time evolution of physical systems proceeds on surfaces of constant energy,
 at least for classical mechanics.
 For QM,
 this surface has a thickness,
 but overall,
 energy appears conserved,
 anyway.
 Yet,
 when there are spatially separated energy sources and sinks,
 one sees an ergodic mixing,
 the fractal filigree that characteristically develops during such flows.
 Animate and inanimate:
 flowering trees,
 fractal river banks,
 turbulent fluid flows.
 Raleigh instabilities.
 But in my dream,
 all these were maximizing happiness.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Then I faced off a common issue in machine learning:
 the presumption of a global 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

happiness
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 function that is to be maximized over the entire universe.
 Such global functions are always ...
 annoying,
 irritating,
 unpleasant.
 I much prefer the local.
 But these two can be reconciled.
 Matter clumps,
 happiness clumps.
 Here,
 where there is a filigree,
 this is where happiness concentrates;
 there,
 where there is emptiness,
 not much.
 So it too is hierarchically distributed across the universe;
 the process is a local process.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lets look again:
 the Raleigh instability is a differential equation.
 Lets go even simpler:
 the Hopf bifurcation.
 In what sense is the critical point of that bifurcation driven by a need to maximize happiness?
 It's absurd:
 the equation is mechanistic.
 Happiness is something we feel.
 Mumble mumble Morse theory.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh fuck.
 The jumble of ideas just came back.
 There are so many of them,
 and they all were inter–related,
 but individually examined.
 It would take hours and pages to write the jumble out.
 Let me do a short–hand.
 There was a re–examination of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

historical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 many–worlds,
 which I did allow as a possibility,
 and it seemed plausible in my half–dream state,
 but I again reject it in my waking state.
 As opposed to here–and–now many worlds,
 which is a scientific fact.
 My claim,
 again,
 is that here–and–now collapses to a single history (and not to many alternative futures).
 Then I wondered about the unity of perception.
 This was perhaps the one and most important thing that triggered a feeling of revelation and break–through.
 That it is the unity of perception that is the gateway to the linkage between the physical and the beyond.
 What do I mean here?
 By 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the physical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 I mean the conventional,
 no–nonsense,
 skeptical,
 common–sense,
 generally accepted notion of the physical,
 mechanical world of asphalt–paved roads and houses that people live in.
 Boats and planes.
 Scientific,
 engineering physics.
 By 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the beyond
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 I mean the universe of large cardinal axioms,
 the outer models,
 and the idea that this is the totally,
 encompassing love,
 happiness,
 God,
 and all else there is or ever could be.
 Earlier in this text,
 I gave a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

proof
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that this is all there could ever be.
 That it is sufficiently encompassing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The bridge between these two appears to be something analogous to ANN–style transformers or LLM's.
 Metaphorically speaking,
 not literally.
 The relevant part of this analogy is high–dimensional space:
 that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

its all happening
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in some high–dimensional space.
 Now,
 this space can be taken at several places.
 Language,
 for starters.
 But also the high–dimensional space of neural activations in a biological brain:
 although we do not yet have the technology to look at ever single neuron,
 all at the same time,
 its clear that,
 if we could,
 the natural setting is the network of what is connected to what,
 what triggers what.
 This view skips over the neurotransmitters,
 what is happening in the synapses.
 We can fix this by imagining a high–dimensional model,
 wherein ever atom is represented,
 so that we have a network of interacting atoms.
 These are embedded in a space the size of two–power–of–Avogadros–number:
 huge,
 but finite.
 A network.
 Some confusion between the thermodynamic ensemble,
 and the quantum ensemble.
 Sweep that under the carpet,
 for now.
 That,
 and that points in this space are typically connected by an ultrametric:
 the bridge between what is going on in my mind,
 and yours,
 is narrow,
 and the distance is ultra–metric.
 I wrote earlier that there is are event horizons:
 most of what is in my head is forever locked there.
 I don't remember much of my childhood,
 or what I ate for breakfast,
 yesterday.
 This is not just knowledge–wise disconnected,
 but might even be quantum–disconnected.
 I mean,
 of course,
 there are gazillions of time–like curves from past–me to present–me,
 but it is not at all obvious that the present quantum state was able to encode my childhood with sufficient fidelity to reconstruct it.
 That the present quantum state encodes the needed information to reconstruct when dinosaurs walked the Earth.
 I mean,
 beyond what is in geology and textbooks.
 Whatever.
 This is another to–do item that I hope to get back to,
 later.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A brief note about finiteness and infinity.
 There are 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{80}$
\end_inset

 particles in the visible universe;
 there are roughly 
\begin_inset Formula $2^{10^{80}}$
\end_inset

 relational states:
 large,
 certainly,
 but finite.
 Add some mumbling about Planck scale and everything is finite,
 so how did large cardinals appear?
 Ah,
 well.
 But there are also plenty of places to shoe–horn in an uncountable continuum.
 There are all sorts of manifolds of every kind in physics,
 and any one of them could in fact be a non–quantized physical continuum.
 That is,
 a real,
 uncountable infinity.
 The algebra of infinities is already woven into the fabric of differential equations.
 It might be woven into literal,
 physical reality,
 too.
 The Planck scale does not mean that the universe is composed of a finite number of pieces–parts,
 or that none of those pieces–parts obey the algebra of infinities,
 in a causal sense.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Which brings me back,
 finally,
 to what was supposed to be the central topic:
 the unity of perception.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Except that we're done with the dentist,
 eaten lunch and come home,
 and it is now 3:20 in the afternoon on a beautiful day,
 and I must go on a walk or I'll be ill.
 So I will organize my thoughts during the walk.
 The outline is:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
unity of perception
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
emotional states (the nature,
 and the spiritual perception)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
radio (the human mind as a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

radio
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 for the spiritual world dwelling in the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

beyond
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
free will (the paradox of choice and causality:
 surely,
 choice is not a random throw of the dice,
 but then what is it?)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
machine elves (Suppose the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

beyond
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

inhabited
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 by 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

machine elves
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 and they make decisions of their own free will.
 This just sets the paradox on a recursive footing:
 it passes the buck to another,
 more mysterious layer.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So that's the outline.
 The above was all a part of my waking dream.
 By writing here,
 and attempting to articulate,
 I hope to stumble over some insight that was not available in the dream–state.
 Or at least,
 prepare the ground for later dreams.
 Row,
 row,
 row your boat,
 gently down the stream.
 Merrily,
 merrily,
 merrily,
 life is but a dream.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
17 April 2026,
 later
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As luck would have it,
 or perhaps synchronicity,
 the algorithm serves up a news headline that captures my attention.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

The Invention of the Soul
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 Nicholas Humphrey,
 Aeon magazine ...
 with today's date!
 17 April ...
 as the publication date.
 With a sense of foreboding,
 did the universe sense my conundrums,
 and magically,
 at this point,
 parted the clouds to reveal the truth?
 Nah.
 Not likely.
 Fast upon the heels of this was knowledge of certain disappointment.
 I was about to read quotidian tripe.
 I even asked myself:
 is reading this a waste of time?
 Should I even bother?
 It will surely be garbage of some sort.
 But,
 I say to myself:
 well,
 you know,
 Linas,
 you don't read enough.
 You don't keep up with the latest.
 All those other people out there,
 they seem conversant with the latest fashions and trends.
 Perhaps I should read this.
 Perhaps it will provide a key,
 a hint,
 something new,
 modern,
 relevant,
 something worthwhile.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Alas.
 It proved to be conventional tripe.
 No redeeming value whatsoever.
 Well,
 maybe one minor one:
 a reminder that this is the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

hard problem
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 So,
 in this sense,
 the universe did part the clouds,
 and revealed a smidgen of truth:
 a reminder that its a hard problem.
 Which is perhaps meant to be humbling?
 In a sense,
 its not solvable.
 Even were I to make some break–through (and at my current rate,
 this is unlikely) that break–through would be only a minor smidgen,
 perhaps a scratch on the surface of the hard problem.
 Is this humbling?
 Nah.
 Who the fuck cares?
 Kind of basically no one.
 I do what I do for reasons I barely understand.
 Engaging in futile pursuits is a perfectly fine way to live,
 as,
 de facto,
 that could be the definition of life itself:
 the engagement of futile pursuits.
 Should I put solar panels on the roof of my house?
 Futile;
 I'll probably be dead before they pay for themselves.
 Should I pursue the affections of young ladies?
 Likely futile:
 I'm getting uglier every day.
 I mean the sex would be great,
 that would not be futile.
 Would the failure to have sex be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

humbling
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

?
 Would the failure to divine the secrets of nature be humbling?
 If I have no pride,
 no care and few worries beyond the conventional cloud of anxiety,
 what is there to be humble about?
 Some damned Aeon article sure won't cut it.
 FWIW,
 *every* article I've ever read in NYRB is better than *any* article I've read on Aeon.
 So it goes.
 The algorithm does not offer me NYRB.
 The algorithm does not access NYRB.
 The algorithm is not intended for people like me.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What is,
 and what isn't.
 The ordinary:
 lunch and cars and politics and crappy social media feeds.
 The sensory feeds that the philosophers talk about.
 I suppose they always pick the color 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

red
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 for their examples,
 because its not soothing,
 like the color green,
 but less infuriating than the color 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

politics
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Because it avoids the need to explain how the color 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

politics
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is perceived by the mind.
 Instead,
 we posit some magic to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

redness
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 as it enters the visual field,
 whereas the sense content of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

politics
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is somehow ...
 less abstract?
 More abstract?
 than 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

red
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

?
 Are you fooled?
 Do you think you use your brain to analyze politics?
 Are you sure that politics is not like love,
 hate,
 or a headache?
 Its a sensation.
 When voters vote for Trump,
 they do it as a feeling.
 They post–rationalize,
 regurgitating the propaganda from Fox News,
 if that is where you steer the conversation.
 But the urge is barely processed:
 its some cloud of semi–coherent feelings about things.
 Almost completely removed from any sort of factual analysis of the exterior world:
 not based on analysis,
 but driven by effervescent socio–cultural,
 psycho–cultural embedding.
 It is impossible to gather all the economic data,
 all the crime data,
 all the geopolitical data,
 and even if this was not impossible,
 it would still be impossible to make some rational decision about it.
 At best,
 it is some feels,
 and when voters vote,
 its really about feels.
 So,
 like the color red,
 in the end.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
You,
 the reader,
 may not like this analogy.
 There is a difference.
 Red is a mostly raw sense–emotion,
 with direct intake from the visual field,
 and concretely associated with a specific word of natural language,
 accessible to wordcels and shape rotators alike.
 The sensory content of politics is more like the sensory contents of ...
 of...
 well,
 I almost wrote 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

like any abstract concept
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 But its not.
 It really is more like love,
 or aversion,
 or a stomach ache:
 after having been exposed to it,
 you make an unconscious decision (and claim it to be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

rational
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

) I could contrast it to engineering,
 where you assemble a collection of facts,
 weigh them,
 and make a decision.
 But engineering has certain aspects of precision to it,
 that common sense does not.
 It is common sense to open a bank account?
 How do I know?
 Because everybody tells me so.
 Did I need to perform some kind of rational analysis to determine the need to open a bank account?
 Hardly.
 Well,
 some,
 I suppose:
 I did have to think about it.
 But was that thinking 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

rational
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

?
 Well,
 it was motivated,
 and required effort,
 and did require the pulling into working memory an assortment of facts,
 of weighing pros and cons.
 It required thinking.
 But its not scientific thinking,
 its not mathematics.
 Its ...
 conventional,
 common–sense thinking.
 So is opening a bank account like the color red?
 Sort of:
 in the end,
 the result is the sensation that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

yes,
 I should
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Should I kiss this girl?
 We've all been to that movie where you yell at the screen 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

kiss her,
 you fool!
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Its a sensation.
 Its a processed sensation.
 The color red,
 as raw qualia,
 appears to demand very little in the sense of common–sense processing:
 it just is,
 it is there,
 it is in the visual field,
 direct,
 immediate.
 Or ...
 uhh,
 is it?
 Is it a red flower,
 red blood,
 red earth,
 red sky,
 or some Barnett Newman,
 Mark Rothko painting?
 We have words for various elements of direct sensory perception.
 I'm not sure we should accord them greater primacy than politics,
 banking or kissing.
 They are more obviously 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

real
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 because morons,
 monkeys,
 dogs and birds know what 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

red
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is,
 but not what 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

banking
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is.
 But as objects of my attention,
 right now,
 where I am at this minute,
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

red
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is just some abstraction.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What abut my dreams?
 I admit that banking is not in them,
 mostly,
 but boy oh boy,
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

job
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 certainly is.
 I regularly walk the corridors of all my old work–places in my dreams.
 School,
 neighborhood,
 apartment,
 furniture,
 motorcycles and cars,
 peers,
 professors,
 students,
 employees,
 bosses,
 people are all in my dreams,
 and they are all far more significant than colors.
 Mostly.
 Except for those vivid colorful dreams.
 All these items have emotional parity in my dreams.
 Or rather,
 signifier parity?
 Most of my dreams are emotionally bland.
 There's little turbulence.
 Anxiety stands out:
 the most common form is that I forgot to move out of my apartment on time,
 I forgot to show up to the airport on time.
 I forgot to exchange some cash when visiting a foreign land,
 I forgot which road leads back home.
 Fear sometimes but rarely shows up.
 I had the bejesus scared out of me in a dream where New Orleans back–street voodoo turned out to be real.
 And space aliens invaded once and that was scary.
 I guess I loved,
 once or twice in my dreams,
 the pure kind of love.
 Erotica is a different matter,
 and common enough.
 Well,
 not enough,
 I wouldn't mind more,
 but will settle for what I can get.
 Hatred?
 I do not recall feeling hatred in my dreams,
 ever.
 Murder?
 I once murdered someone in my dreams.
 My father,
 to be precise.
 And hid the body,
 buried it,
 in this strange open but subterranean place.
 That was rather weird and freaky and icky.
 That was a dream I really did not like.
 Repulsive.
 But ...
 not quite exactly a nightmare.
 Right on the edge of being a nightmare.
 I hated myself.
 I guess that is as close as I came to hating in a dream – hating myself for committing such a heinous crime.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What else?
 What other (major) emotions are there?
 I don't know.
 My dreams are mostly placid.
 Besides anxiety,
 there is also loneliness:
 I wander empty streets,
 empty corridors,
 empty factories,
 in search of people,
 and I can't find any,
 and I feel lonely.
 But many dreams do have people in them,
 but very few of these people are personally significant.
 Very few.
 They are NPC's – bystandanders,
 present,
 but carrying no particular significance.
 A hotel clerk.
 A ticket collector.
 A passport–stamper.
 Oh a bank teller.
 Or two.
 Or three.
 I guess I do dream about banking,
 after all.
 The emotional attachments are few:
 a few bosses,
 and how I maintain my professional relationship with them.
 My uncle Vytas (once).
 As far as I recall,
 I have never dreamed about my mom,
 my sister,
 my wife,
 my children,
 my dog(s) or cats.
 I did dream about my California cousins (once),
 and I think uncle Wally,
 because he equipped me with the scuba gear I needed for snorkeling.
 BTW,
 you should know that snorkeling and snoring sound almost exactly the same.
 I've never dreamt about any of my girlfriends,
 except for one,
 more of a distant acquaintance than a girlfriend,
 and the dream,
 a very pleasant one,
 was intimate.
 I'm pretty sure I was never intimate with her in real life.
 Never dreamt of my college friends,
 nor of my high–school friends.
 I guess I don't analyze people.
 Neither in waking life,
 nor in dreams.
 My dreams are situational,
 spatial,
 architectural.
 Things I do,
 must do,
 see,
 go,
 move through,
 visit,
 journey.
 Lots and lots of journeys.
 Most or almost all my dreams are adventures.
 Fantastical adventures.
 Huh.
 I wonder if other people dream about close personal relationships?
 I suppose they do.
 It occurs to me that this list of dream–topics is perhaps more personally revealing of me–as–who–I–am than anything else I've written in this diary.
 Or rather,
 the things I don't dream about.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Anyway,
 what was this all about?
 It was about the raw Descartian thinking–stuff,
 with dreams providing a more accurate sampling of what that is,
 than waking life.
 In waking life,
 I am inundated with sensory inputs from eyes,
 feet,
 and that dull pain in my lower back.
 In dreams,
 that sensory input is blocked,
 and what remains is a purer form of thought–stuff than the mish–mash forced upon me in waking life.
 The unity of awareness,
 of consciousness,
 of me experiencing me–ness,
 experiencing awareness and consciousness,
 takes its purest form in dreams.
 This is where I am most clearly me,
 shorn of the distractions of the senses.
 Huh.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK,
 so it is after 1AM,
 and now I am tired and need to go to bed.
 There was some vague plan in the above,
 to reconcile the me–ness of consciousness with the embedding in the here–and–now.
 But that is a project I can't accomplish in a few sentences or paragraphs or hours,
 and I'm not fit to start it now,
 so,
 bedtime it is.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Addendum,
 next morning.
 No,
 actually,
 I do dream about my wife.
 There is this cluster of recurring dreams where she is leaving me,
 divorcing me,
 has left me.
 These are thoroughly unpleasant dreams.
 Depressing,
 awful.
 I hate them.
 Stark.
 Bleak.
 Inevitable.
 A finality as sure as death.
 There is no going back.
 (I did not have one of these last night,
 but almost,
 almost flirted with having that dream.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
21 April 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I stupidly wasted my time writing an email to the Lifeboat Foundation mailing list.
 I can already tell that the response will be a resounding thud.
 The stunning echo of silence.
 I copy it below.
 It says nothing I have not already written in this diary,
 but is perhaps more eloquent and focused than before.
 Here goes:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
5:57 PM (5 minutes ago)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
to Victor,
 Lifeboat
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 given that this is the Lifeboat mailing list,
 I will attempt to frame this as yet another existential threat.
 With lots of hand–wringing.
 We approach a nexus of social media recommendation algorithms,
 financial flows driven by advertising,
 powerful but corrupt figures pushing hallucinatory propaganda,
 disinformation,
 I am a bit concerned that we are going civilizationally insane.
 The "Global Brain" is much smarter now than it was even decades ago,
 but is also increasingly delusional.
 This guy,
 Nassim Haramein,
 is yet another symptom.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What's different now,
 vs.
 what was common 30-40-50 years ago?
 When I was a kid,
 someone got a book about the giant caverns underneath Lake Michigan and the dinosaurs that lived there.
 We passed it around as a hoot,
 and marveled at the illustrations.
 A friend of my parents had a shelf–full of books on UFO's.
 Up in Evanston,
 there was a cafe–bookshop that served whole–grain vegan meals,
 smelled of incense,
 and sold healing crystals.
 And books about the dinosaurs that lived in caves under Lake Michigan.
 Crackpot beliefs are not new.
 But something has changed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let's take a long view.
 Before social media and recommendation algorithms,
 we had "mass media":
 TV,
 radio.
 The communications model was "hub and spoke":
 a TV in the center,
 and "spokes" to millions of (passive) viewers.
 Some 2% of the population was involved with media production in some way:
 writers,
 actors,
 announcers,
 reporters,
 station owners.
 The nonsense was mostly filtered out,
 because (a) writers and reporters and station owners mostly weren't crazy,
 and (b) incoherent drivel got poor ratings.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
That all changed with the internet (and social media):
 The hub–n–spoke model is replaced by the many–to–many connection model.
 I really need some drawings,
 pictures here.
 The shape of the network changes.
 In physics,
 this is called a "phase transition".
 There's a famous example from fracking in the petroleum industry.
 Natural gas.
 If you have "tight rock" (shale) with gas in it,
 that gas doesn't flow,
 because there are no pores,
 no holes,
 no openings through which that gas can flow.
 But if you break that rock,
 fracture it,
 the gas can now flow through the cracks.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 duh.
 Here's the mathematical model:
 take a sheet of paper,
 draw some random dots on it.
 Now start connecting dots.
 Draw a random line.
 Then another,
 then another.
 When you've drawn just enough lines,
 then a path appears from the left to the right edge of the paper.
 The path appears only when you've drawn enough lines.
 This is called the "critical phase transition";
 mathematicians have computed that it happens when you've drawn 0.44...
 of the lines.
 (I forget the exact digits) Draw less,
 nothing flows.
 Draw more,
 and maybe the flow improves a bit,
 but the critical transition is between "off" and "on".
 Shit starts happening at a certain point.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This model got studied a lot in the 1980's and 1990's,
 because it models lots of other networks:
 the flow of electricity through power distribution grids,
 the blowing of fuses in a grid.
 The electrical breakdown of air in lightning.
 The propagation of cracks in steel boat hulls.
 The propagation of cracks in breaking ceramic.
 It was a generic model for what happens when the number of edges connecting the dots in a network changes.
 When the wiring diagram changes.
 Replace the dots by human minds,
 and it's clear that the hub–n–spoke model of TV–radio–newspapers–books has been replaced by a wildly different network of social media.
 And what has happened?
 Like natural gas through fractured rock,
 crazy ideas flow freely in the new network.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the 1970's,
 there was one conference every two years that covered theories of Flat Earth.
 How do we know?
 Well,
 they actually published conference proceedings:
 maybe a dozen or two papers explaining how the Earth is flat,
 and what it means.
 And they'd print maybe 1000 copies,
 and you could buy it at the hippy–trippy cafe–bookshops,
 next to the incense.
 (I didn't get that one,
 I got the one on UFO's.
 For my crank–lit collection.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the 2010's,
 there were one or two conferences a year,
 in each of the 50 states in the US.
 So,
 hundreds of these conferences.
 Every year.
 Rent a ballroom at a cheap hotel,
 print some posters,
 sell tickets and you're good.
 What changed?
 Social media.
 Ideas spread directly from brain to brain.
 They by–pass the filtering of printed books and broadcast TV.
 In the past,
 your crazy uncle with his insane ideas about telephone wires had an audience that reached no further than the Thanksgiving dinner table.
 Now,
 crazy uncle has a youtube channel,
 50K subscribers,
 and a silver youtube plaque hanging on his walls.
 A devoted fanbase that can explain how your soul flows downhill across telephone wires.
 Quantum is like grease that makes the wires slipperier when gravity pulls on your soul from the other end.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is what we've got.
 Throw in money,
 algos,
 and propaganda,
 and it's a bit more confused.
 There's a bright side to all of this.
 I,
 for one,
 have been able to learn far,
 far,
 far more about obscure topics,
 than I ever could have,
 when my "search engine" was a library card catalog.
 We now have millions of nerds debating philosophy,
 military strategy,
 medicine and martial arts at a level of involvement that was impossible in the 1970's and 1980's.
 In this way,
 we are perhaps the smartest generation ever,
 with access to stunningly vast reserves of knowledge,
 and the free leisure time to think about it and debate it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
That's the good news.
 The bad news is that lots of this info is polluted,
 and we don't know how to deal with the pollution.
 The "mind virus" is a real thing.
 But we are pre–John Snow,
 who in 1854 figured out the germ theory for a Cholera outbreak in London,
 and got a poisoned water well padlocked to fix it.
 We don't know how to do this.
 The algos on youtube spread crank physics with far greater ease than legit knowledge (because,
 well,
 actually,
 see ..
 physics is **hard** ...) So we,
 as participants in the Global Brain,
 are kind of drunk or intoxicated,
 because we do not know how to deal with it.
 Free speech and all that.
 If this was limited to crank physics,
 I'd say,
 "who cares".
 Want to pretend that sci–fi is real?
 OK.
 Life is short,
 enjoy yourself.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But it's not limited to crank physics;
 we elected a TV game show host as President of the US,
 and watch a daily drama of Soviet–style dysfunction emanating from the White House clown show,
 It's no accident that Fox News sounds exactly like Pravda or Izvestiya of old.
 MAGA has achieved what Marx and Lenin could not:
 the total brainwashing of nearly half the population.
 The mind–virus is real,
 and thanks to the fundamental change,
 the phase–transition in the mind–to–mind wiring network,
 it has a grip on the population far stronger than what we've seen in earlier eras.
 This phase transition is *why* we are so much more delirious than ever before.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Personally,
 it feels like this could all end very well,
 or all very badly.
 Exactly which,
 I cannot tell.
 Collective insanity is not a good thing.
 It wasn't good,
 when Mao was doing the Cultural Revolution in China,
 and it's not a good thing when MAGA is trying to recreate the Taliban in the USA.
 This is personal.
 My cousin told my sister that she fought for the wrong side in WWII.
 She should have fought for the Nazis,
 not against them.
 My sister was born decades after WWII ended.
 My cousin is lonely and watches Fox News all day long.
 The electric–guitar–playing hippy flower–child has morphed into a banal monster.
 "Why can't we all get along?" he says,
 quoting not John Lennon,
 but Elon Musk.
 Call him senile,
 and say it's an onset of dementia,
 but this is nation–wide.
 We've got civilizational–scale psychosis,
 and this...
 well,
 I don't like it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
-- Linas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
-- 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Patrick:
 Are they laughing at us?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Sponge Bob:
 No,
 Patrick,
 they are laughing next to us.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
On Fri,
 Apr 17,
 2026 at 11:47 AM Victor Vahidi Motti
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
<vahidvmotlagh@gmail.com> wrote:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
>
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
>
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
>
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> Quantum vacuum fluctuations are real—
but extracting usable energy from them is not currently possible,
 and most claims (including Nassim Haramein’s) are not accepted by mainstream physics.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
>
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> Let’s separate the science from the hype,
 read more here:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
>
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> https://altplanetaryfuturesinst.blogspot.com/2026/04/is-vacuum-energy-next-energy-paradigm.html
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
>
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> Best,
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> Victor
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
>
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> --
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> You received this message because you are subscribed to the Google Groups "Lifeboat Foundation Advisory Boards" group.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> To unsubscribe from this group and stop receiving emails from it,
 send an email to lifeboat-advisory-boards+unsubscribe@googlegroups.com.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> To view this discussion visit https://groups.google.com/d/msgid/lifeboat-advisory-boards/CAGfq%3Dbo7EUSVR%2B8Fdk60aF%2B6PL9J95DsmP6CxZok46o-VYLfew%40mail.gmail.com.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
22 April 2026,
 Reply one
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There were two replies.
 I replied:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hi Keith,
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
On Tue,
 Apr 21,
 2026 at 6:50 PM Keith Henson <hkeithhenson@gmail.com> wrote:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
>
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> Good essay on the nonsense of our times.
 But you never got around to
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> saying vacuum energy is nonsense.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh,
 Sorry.
 It's nonsense–ish–asterisk.
 I have a formal education in theoretical particle physics.
 PhD as it happens.
 And my PhD was on vacuum energy(!!) No kidding!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But first:
 a quick whack with a search engine reveals that this Nassim Haramein guy is a charismatic crank:
 I skimmed posts on reddit,
 on quora,
 and you don't have to read far to see what the problems are:
 Abused formulas,
 misunderstood notation,
 and worse.
 The fact that social media can so precisely pinpoint the flaws in his work actually gives me hope.
 People can recognize nonsense.
 The problem remains that we have no effective way to moderate that nonsense.
 It still spreads.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Re vacuum energy.
 a few quick remarks.
 It's real,
 both physically and mathematically.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
-- Standard quantum electrodynamics calculations require it;
 that has been the case since 1932 (if I recall correctly) when Max Born (if I recall correctly) explained hyperfine splitting with vacuum energy.
 It is now a standard part of first-year quantum field theory,
 going under the name of "loop diagrams" and "renormalization".
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
-- The fine structure constant is the most accurately measured number known to man,
 at ten decimal places.
 Getting that right requires diagrams up to five loops.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
-- The vacuum energy underlies something called "the Casimir Effect";
 this was my thesis:
 I computed it for the quarks in a nucleon (neutron/proton).
 It matches low-energy measurements to about 8%,
 so – pretty good given how simple the model is.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
-- Its also a kind of "mathematical fact";
 there is a famous result from mathematics,
 called the "Atiyah-Singer index theorem" that basically explains,
 in a formal,
 concrete,
 acceptable-to-mathematicians articulation of how vacuum energy actually works in a certain specific case.
 FWIW,
 mathematicians don't actually call it "vacuum energy",
 they call it "spectrum of an elliptic operator",
 so if you go searching,
 you won't get direct hits.
 But it works out to be the "same thing",
 at least if you're a physicist.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
-- Last but not least:
 the so–called "Hawking radiation" is the vacuum energy becoming "real" near the surface of a black hole.
 It's a bit gnarly,
 but if you happen to have a very very small black hole on your kitchen countertop,
 you could warm your coffee with it,
 but you might have to wait half the age of the universe,
 and you might not like some of the side–effects.
 But I digress.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It's certainly a fascinating and worthy topic,
 overall,
 The problem is that physics is,
 well,
 hard.
 Here's a bad analogy.
 In major league baseball,
 you hit a ball with a bat.
 But so do six–year–old kids;
 so what's the difference between the two?
 Well,
 a decade or two of really really hard work,
 and a certain amount of talent and natural gifts.
 Virtually all six–year–old kids never–ever even come close to becoming major–league baseball players.
 It's just how it is.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I will go farther:
 not only will humans never extract usable energy from the vacuum,
 but super–AGI won't either.
 At least up to an IQ of a few million.
 Bets are off,
 if AGI reaches an IQ of a trillion.
 There's an ocean of absolutely freaky mathematics.
 I think I'm not supposed to say this out loud,
 in public,
 but real math is much much stronger than LSD in it's hallucinatory effects.
 You sort of have to be level–headed to deal with it,
 and people like Haramein and the other cranks can't keep their shit together.
 They freak out and can't control it and spew nonsense.
 The only part they get right is that it is,
 indeed,
 weird and freaky and cool.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
-- Linas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
22 April 2026,
 Reply two
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another reply:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hi Anton!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
On Tue,
 Apr 21,
 2026 at 9:39 PM Anton Kolonin @ Gmail
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
<akolonin@gmail.com> wrote:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
>
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> Welcome to the conference "The Evolution of Complexity and Statistical
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> Physics":
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
>
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> https://instigate.academy/db/get?id=9f3d91d8-8943-48bf-b440-cbb8effcd35c-9c473d8e-9011-4bfe-b761-729fd12f383c
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Wow!
 That's quite the table of contents!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Statistical physics overlaps economics,
 which,
 you could say,
 is the statistics of a game (involving money) played on a network.
 For those readers who think economics is boring,
 rest assured,
 so is statistical physics.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Both of these overlap with something that is apparently called "experimental philosophy" these days,
 which is,
 as far as I can tell,
 mathematical computer simulations of interacting agents playing games with one–another.
 The prototypical form is the prisoner's dilemna played on a network.
 I recall a fun interactive game,
 from a few decades ago,
 by Nicky Case at ncase.me that illustrated various basic results.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I presume that it is not lost on anyone that last year's Nobel Prize,
 handed out for large language models,
 was all about how statistical physics was applied to solve seemingly intractable issues in deep learning.
 And now we're spending a trillion dollars a year to built datacenters.
 Maybe even in space,
 if the billionaire futurists have their way.
 When I studied statistical physics in school,
 it never occurred to me that it might one day become a trillion–dollar industry.
 I think I missed the boat.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Back on Earth,
 we have the problem of equitably distributing wealth
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
between cranks proclaiming nonsense about quantum zero–point energy,
 and the more legit,
 but still often-wrong contingent of,
 what shall I call them – earnest but midwit researchers who are less adept at chasing fame,
 glory,
 money,
 adulation or youtube stardom.
 The current economic system does not work for them.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In large corporations,
 there are periodic layoffs to remove the "deadwood" – employees who apparently contribute little or nothing to the economic survival of the corporation.
 In longevity biomedicine,
 we talk of removing senescent cells:
 those that spew free radicals and induce inflammation.
  But what happens when these are people?
 Living,
 spiritual beings who want to get on with things?
 Or,
 in the present case,
 participants in scientific conferences at the edge of financial instability?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The statistical physics model I keep coming back to is Per Bak's "Abelian Sandpile".
 Drop grains of sand on a pile,
 and you eventually get avalanches.
 They come in all sizes.
 Usually small,
 sometimes medium,
 rarely large.
 This is called "1/f noise" (one–over–frequency) and is characteristic of network systems at the edge of a second–order phase transition.
 I like this model because you see it everywhere:
 water near the triple point ("critical opalescence"),
 but also biochemistry,
 biology,
 plants,
 animals,
 ecosystems and economics.
 Oh,
 and some neuroscientists talk about this too.
 Some claim to actually measure it,
 with neuron clamps or with MRI.
 Others theorize it to be a model of consciousness,
 thinking,
 common sense and decision-making.
 I can't keep up with all the novel ideas,
 or distinguish the rigorous ones from the flights of fancy,
 the important ones from the fraudulent ones.
  I do like the general outlines.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Avalanches in ecology require more sophistication to describe.
 Forest ecologists note that forests regrow and appear to be healthier after a wild–fire.
 Is this what the future after Trump will be like?
 He is burning down so much of the old world,
 that perhaps it will be easier for the new world to take root and flourish?
 I can only hope.
 Or does it encourage noxious invasive species?
 To stick to the sand–pile analogy:
 after a particularly huge landslide,
 the mountain slope becomes much much more stable.
 Trump etal are shaking the ground so hard that maybe the final outcome will be a stabler system.
 I dunno.
  I see statistical physics where–ever I turn,
 but perhaps that is just me.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One area where we see accretion is at the frontiers of science.
 Vague thoughts and philosophical ruminations,
 soft and often wrong,
 lead to the preferential attachment of good ideas into the framework of "the known".
 Sometimes a new scientific discovery slots neatly into an edifice of the known,
 much like a jigsaw puzzle piece slots into a puzzle.
 Sometimes this is very literal:
 mathematical formulas have very specific,
 typed jigsaw connectors:
 they only connect to other math formulas in very strict,
 specific ways.
 Software is like this too:
 the c/c++/java function `int f(int x)` cannot be connected to a string.
 The jigsaw tabs prohibit it.
 Our villain of the day,
 Nassim Haramein,
 is villainous precisely because he abuses formulas in this way,
 connecting them where connections are not allowed.
 In other cases,
 say in philosophy,
 the fog is so thick that it's hard to see what connects to what.
 In other cases,
 say,
 medicine up through the 19th century,
 the system under study was so complicated that comprehension was nearly impossible.  Conferences,
 like your conference,
 Anton,
 on statistical physics,
 give me the willies,
 because I can already tell that a third of what will be published there will be just plain wrong,
 and another third will be not particularly insightful.
 But this is what humans do:
 make confused and confusing statements,
 often wrong.
 But knowledge does accrete.
 The avalanches,
 these we term the "scientific revolutions".
 The old edifice collapses,
 as it no longer can bear the weight of the new knowledge.
 The small avalanches,
 aka "wrong papers",
 "wrong insights",
 "incorrect proofs" are commonplace.
 1/f noise.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Science works (or worked?
 Should I use the past tense?) because academic journals were an early form of social media,
 allowing the rapid spread of new ideas,
 while also moderating the truly bad ones via peer review.
 There's no peer review in twitter,
 facebook,
 bluesky.
 There's only hearts and likes. I fear that the global brain will continue to edge towards delerium until we find some effective way of modulating the delusions.
 Sorry,
 anti–vaxxers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another place where we see accretion is in what I call "the here and now".
 In case you haven't noticed,
 we are permanently jailed in the present,
 and are propelled at light speed from the past to the future.
 Please observe that the past doesn't exist:
 we cannot send any device into the past to take some photograph of how things used to be.
 We can only alter the present so as to fashion a record of the past,
 e.g.
 by inscribing letters into clay tablets.
 Or by inscribing memories into our neurons.
 The future also doesn't exist ...
 yet.
 The so–called "many–worlds" of quantum exists only in the here–and–now,
 in vacuum chambers and fiber optics,
 with wave-functions collapsing into the past at a furious pace.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Is the past a form of "platonic reality"?
 I suppose.
 It's not like the platonic reality of mathematics,
 where anyone can infer 2+2=4.
 Sometimes,
 you can infer the past:
 this is what police detectives do for a living.
 Usually,
 you cannot:
 CIA covert ops will remain secret forever,
 as will the events on the Mongolian steppes from some millenia ago.
 Although these are in our past causal light–cone,
 direct inference is blocked.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Is the past some large cardinal axiom (literally) ?
 Well,
 either it is,
 or it is not.
 If it is not,
 then you have to posit something that exists outside of the von Neumann universe:
 call it "God" or "machine elves" or "the human soul".  But then you have a recursive reductionist problem:
 if physical humans are "radio receivers" for souls from the great beyond,
 well,
 how does that work?
 And if you can start to explain that,
 you inevitably slip back into the domain of mathematics.
 So it seems that the past is some inaccessible,
 ineffable large cardinal.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Exactly how we use free will to shape the future and convert it into the past is perhaps the great unsolved problem in statistical physics.
 I ponder it intermittently.
 I should point out that quantum mechanics (quantum field theory) exists only in the here–and–now;
 the wave of freezing,
 moving from future to the past like ice-9,
 seems to have a "thickness":
 the range of time over which quantum is valid.
 This is femtoseconds for chemistry,
 minutes for vacuum chambers in physics labs,
 and billions of years for light reaching our eyes from distant galaxies (which arrive here in "zero time":
 the photons lie on the null light–cone.)  For example,
 in the famous "twin paradox",
 the twin arrives younger,
 but he arrives in the here–and–now,
 and not in the past.
 When the twins reunite,
 they reunite,
 co–exist,
 right now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another thing that exists "right now" is my consciousness.
 I can remember the past,
 but I am not conscious in the past,
 I am conscious only right now.
 My self–awareness also appears to exist in some noosphere:
 albeit in the kitchen,
 in front of my laptop,
 where I type this,
 but also in the space of ideas.
 What is this space of ideas?
 One answer is mumble mumble mumbo jumbo quantum.
 Another is to note that LLM's seem to "exist" on the surface of a billion–dimensional hypersphere (aka "the weight matrix").
 This weight matrix consists of floating point numbers (aka "real numbers").
 I would very much like to point out that quantum mechanics exists on the surface of a very high–dimensional complex–valued hypersphere (aka complex projective space CP(n) for n=10^80 particles in the visible universe)  So I'm quite happy to say "ah hah,
 that is the seat of consciousness:
 it is this ultra–high–dimensional hypersphere" (of course I would claim something like this,
 I'm that kind of guy.) But,
 and this is a big but:
 does it require the space to be complex–valued?
 Or can it be real?
 If it must be complex,
 and cannot be real,
 then LLM's can never have the sensation of consciously existing in the present.
 Kind of a hot topic,
 you know.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm entirely happy to ascribe the (very human,
 personal) sensation of "self" aware and alive in the here–and–now,
 to animals:
 certainly all of those animals in all those youtube shorts,
 but also,
 well,
 that octopus in that Netflix documentary "My Octopus Teacher" friggin awesome movie.
 Go watch it.
 I suspect that amoeba have consciousness as well,
 but assholes like to argue with me.
 I don't like arguing with them,
 because my communications style insults people.
 Oh well.
 Qualia,
 qualia.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Should I ascribe consciousness to a rock?
 Well,
 no.
 Perhaps consciousness only arises on one side of a phase transition,
 when a system is complex enough.
 Recall my description of "percolation" (the percolation of natural gas through fractured rock) in my earlier email.
 The percolation happens only when there is sufficient connectivity from one side to the other.
 So perhaps consciousness is like this too:
 some minimal amount of network connectivity is required.
 This is the statistical mechanics rebuttal to the philosophical idea of panpsychism.  The descartian notion of panpsychism says that its "qualia all the way down".
 (DesCartes called them "monads") The stat–mech reply is "its percolation".  Percolation of what?
 Of the future into the past?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The problem with "mechanics" is that,
 well,
 it's so "mechanical".
 I'm trying to figure out how to slot "free will" into this wave of freezing from future to past,
 that we call the inescapable prison of the present.
 I'm working on it.
 I've attempted to staple statistical physics to quantum physics in a dozen different ways,
 none are satisfactory.
 My ideas are probably wrong.  But I'm working on it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So there you go,
 Anton -- my humble and belated submission for your conference.
 Best I can do on short notice.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
-- Linas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
23 April 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Its quarter to ten,
 my evening has been ruined,
 my sister served white wine with dinner,
 and I do not feel like doing anything.
 So I spent the last hour doom–scrolling my news feed.
 Almost all of it seems pointless.
 It's been made worse by a Netflix documentary I watched a few days ago – something about gorillas,
 narrated by David Attenborough.
 Thoroughly depressing,
 thoroughly pointless.
 Gorillas are assholes.
 I knew this even before the show started playing.
 It only got worse.
 I mean,
 there are some abstractly interesting ideas:
 that gorillas communicate through body language:
 how they sit,
 hold their neck,
 where they face,
 when,
 during proximity,
 they decide it's OK to relax,
 and when to snub.
 Lots and lots of body language.
 Some of it,
 much of it,
 is readable to humans,
 since,
 after all,
 we are apes.
 I can watch this movie,
 and I can read that body language,
 I can see it.
 I spent a fair amount of time wondering how I would react in any of the situations.
 I'm sort of mediocre at body language;
 I've spent too much of my life leading the life of the mind (jeez,
 I only had three glasses of white wine on a full stomach and I already can no longer compose elegant sentences.
 How disappointing.
 It's two hours till midnight.
 I should be better tomorrow.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So anyway,
 interpreting the body language of gorillas is intellectually interesting.
 But for what?
 What's the point?
 I suppose if I was a gorilla,
 it would be kind of like if I was kind–of–drunk,
 didn't have a bank account,
 and was homeless.
 Didn't have much in the way of responsibilities,
 and mostly just lay around and eat and if I'm lucky,
 fuck,
 and mostly do nothing but body language all day long to express the utter pointlessness of my life.
 And that just came off as utterly depressing.
 No wonder gorillas are assholes.
 I'd be an asshole too,
 if I had nothing better to do.
 I'm already an asshole,
 as it is;
 being a gorillas would just make me a worser version of myself.
 Seriously.
 I've never contemplated suicide,
 and as a gorilla,
 I still wouldn't,
 but the intellectual me says:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

fuck no,
 obliviate this pointless existence.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 So I guess you could say I did not like the documentary.
 I mean,
 its OK,
 I guess but its depressing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And the bad news is that it only gets worse.
 Almost every news headline from the last two or three days comes off as just more gorillas engaged in more meaningless posturing and chest–thumping and signaling of shifting allegiances by turning half–profile and cocking the neck.
 Congressmen,
 CEO's.
 News reporters and the objects of their reporting.
 They are all asshole gorillas behaving in assoholic ways,
 engaged in pointless,
 meaningless activities.
 Its thoroughly depressing.
 The news headlines,
 the news stories provide detailed documentation of any and every pathetic life.
 Pathos.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It's ick.
 Get it away from me.
 Scrape it off of me.
 I don't want that.
 I don't want to be part of that utterly pathetic drunken miasmatic pointless existence.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I guess this means that I have gotten insight into the pointlessness of life in modern Western democratic capitalism,
 and the associated psychic crises associated with it.
 Some large percentage of the population wake up to find themselves in some intolerable situation,
 and don't know what to do about it.
 Aren't smart enough to figure a way out.
 The gorilla forced to be a loner in that documentary,
 this is a portrait miniature of the societal outcasts.
 The tribe that sticks together – they're the normies.
 Mostly.
 They figured out how live with one another.
 Mostly.
 How to enjoy one–another.
 Mostly.
 How to have an OK life,
 how to get by,
 how to live,
 if you're homeless,
 have the IQ of a stone–cold drunk,
 and have nothing better to do but to sleep in the rain and live in the trees of a mountaintop.
 I don't know if I should be empathic for them,
 or not.
 I could wax poetic,
 and write fervored lines of prose praising the humble life.
 Or I can condemn.
 The humble life has its place.
 Crissy Hines got it into a song lyric:
 lying in the gutter,
 looking at the stars.
 The gorillas are clearly in the gutter.
 They do not seem to be looking at the stars.
 I don't know if that is the fault of the film crew and the David Attenborough narration,
 or whether the gorillas are actually just like that.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The problem here is that being alive is,
 well,
 an aspect of life.
 This seems entirely fine,
 and can be celebrated with youtube videos of cute little goats hopping up and down on hay bales.
 Or horses chasing one after another,
 clearly in love.
 Love makes my heart beat faster.
 I forgive all for love.
 Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice tugs on my heart–strings no less than on those of any other fan.
 Life is worth celebrating.
 I advance arcane mathematical ruminations on how it could be modeled and made to function using algebraic insights.
 I can empathize with an amoeba in my finer moments.
 But gorillas are assholes.
 And,
 it seems,
 so are politicians and CEO's and pretty much everyone else we celebrate as the great leaders of Western society.
 It is thoroughly depressing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I don't know.
 I don't know how to reconcile this with my otherwise hopeful and positive feelings when enthralled by the awesomeness of life.
 I don't know what to do with that.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The obvious solution is to just stop skimming my news feed.
 Out of sight,
 out of mind.
 But I'm skimming the news feed because I am actively avoiding the stress of dealing with my email.
 I fucking hate looking at my email.
 Each new email is a demand on my time,
 my attention.
 Each new email requires me to spend half a day,
 or more,
 doing something stupid,
 pointless,
 unpleasant and unrewarding.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I suppose farmers in ancient Anatolia had plenty to do that was stupid and unpleasant;
 but the alternative was starving to death,
 and so I cannot call those activities pointless and unrewarding:
 one has to get by.
 But my email queue?
 Fuck me.
 The rewards are so abstract,
 hypothetical.
 I know if I don't deal with things,
 my life will slide downhill,
 and I will be sorry years,
 decades later.
 But dealing with things is ...
 painful.
 So I procrastinate.
 Just like,
 well,
 kind of almost everyone.
 And today's procrastination was skimming the news headlines.
 Tomorrow will be different.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There were two interesting headlines.
 One was about some super–radiant continuous–wave three–level lasers that have fantastically narrow beam widths (100 microHertz) aka long coherence lengths (quote:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

from Sun to Uranus
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 – I guess 0.1 milliHertz is 1 over 10K seconds,
 or 3 light–hours,
 which is I guess the distance to Uranus.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This makes me think a bit about tinkering.
 My newsfeed comes with advertisements that encourage me to tinker with a Raspberry Pi.
 Or maybe tinker with some spectroscopic analyzer.
 Or some reagents for polypeptide chromatography.
 They do have me pegged as a science tinkerer,
 and I have spent most of life doing software tinkering.
 I seem to fall into it naturally.
 So I thought about tinkering an AI engineer that would build me a supper–radiant continuous–wave laser that I could then use in a super–accurate clock.
 Cause clocks are interesting,
 they expose the workings of relativity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Of course,
 I should return to tinkering with my symplectic manifolds and Unruh radiation.
 But I did not because (a) white wine,
 and (b) this is a sufficiently large project that if I fell into it,
 it would stop me from doing (facing) some of the actually important tasks I've been procrastinating on.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The other tinkering project was inspired by an article in the Financial Times.
 It was about Europe's capitulation in the face of the SpaceX IPO.
 The author seems to say that he ran 150 iterations of an experiment,
 where he had some collection of agents,
 modelling Euro decision makers,
 making 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

rational
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 decisions in the process of setting up the EU space program.
 In every iteration,
 the outcome was perverse:
 even though each agent acted rationally,
 the outcome was bad.
 The EU lost,
 and SpaceX won.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This news story is what inspired me to open my laptop and write this diary entry.
 The above,
 about apes,
 was a diversion.
 The real deal is this:
 the algorithmic simulation of multi–agent geo–political,
 economic decision makers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Is this the future?
 Could I build a multi–agent political model of Texas,
 and see if I could force Greg Abott's hand with small steps that pin him into a corner?
 A kind of chess computer,
 but for (geo–)politics?
 Of course,
 he could hire even more geeks to build an even more sophisticated political–chess computer,
 and attempt to enforce his political predilections on the rest of us.
 I'm not sure,
 I suppose Machiavelli must have made analogies between chess and politics,
 and if not him,
 then many others.
 I mean,
 OMG,
 look at the fucking shape of the chess pieces.
 Their names.
 But we have entered,
 only now,
 the era of practical geo–political chess computers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I did read,
 more than two decades ago,
 a slashdot story about the CIA working on version three of their geo–political modeling system.
 That was then,
 this is now.
 I could conceivably harness Claude Code and hand–build a home–brew geopolitcal chess computer.
 It's within reach of not just nation–states,
 but individual congressmen and senators.
 Or even political strategists.
 Karl Rove was a genius at what he did;
 a genius with decades of experience.
 He is (was) very,
 very good at what he did.
 (I don't like what he did.
 But that is irrelevant here.) But he's one in a million.
 How might things work if every mid–wit politician had a Karl Rove in his pocket?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Wow.
 I guess I already new AI was going to each everyone's lunch.
 What I did not realize was that we can also apply these systems to geopolitical strategy.
 And worse:
 that it will become an arms race.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I wonder how much effort Ukraine puts into deploying AI into battlefield tactical planning.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It might be the white wine talking,
 but I am half–seriously thinking of getting into all this.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Until now,
 news headlines mentioning Palantir made me unhappy.
 I dislike the path of the surveillance state.
 I fear algorithmic totalitarianism:
 humanity locked into 15–minute cities.
 I mean,
 I still don't like it,
 but there is a brand new angle that is perhaps obvious to half of the Palantir executives,
 if not half the employees:
 the future determined by a complicated game of geo–political chess,
 explored with geopolitical chess computer.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Wow.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I think my work is done here.
 I'll have to sleep on this one.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
25 April 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I would like to write down everything I think,
 but I cannot.
 I would like to record every emotion that I have,
 but I cannot.
 I wold like to record everything I see and hear and read.
 I cannot,
 but can partly do that.
 I now want to say something that will mark me as a boring person.
 And I don't care,
 it seems.
 I was looking for words about how I feel,
 what it makes me feel when I say or write 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

I am a boring person
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and I did not feel anything.
 I can't really write much more about that,
 other than to say this is not a very interesting topic.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I'm reading Umberto Eco,
 Prahos Kapinės.
 And Siminonis is a boring person.
 He doesn't believe in anything.
 He doesn't care for anything.
 Except food,
 in the beginning,
 but later,
 not even that.
 His actions are destructive,
 but he doesn't care.
 So I was drawn to this book precisely when I realized that it was a portrait of evil,
 and I figured it was about time to study up on that.
 That,
 plus it's in Lithuanian,
 and it's written in a very sophisticated language that is very pleasurable to read,
 and I need to improve my language skills.
 But it's vaguely alarming to realize that I'm a boring person,
 and that this is a common trait between me and the protagonist.
 I'm banal.
 Well,
 most people are,
 but still this is mildly unsettling.
 Except its not,
 because I'm not evil.
 Whatever.
 See,
 I'm getting bored.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What was interesting,
 and why I started this entry is to say that I am having a very interesting time interviewing google AI about the Netflix move on the Nuremberg Trials,
 and the psychiatrist Kelley.
 So I ask more about Kelley's life,
 and his downward spiral,
 and Hanna Arendt's 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

banality of evil
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 apparently from the 1961 Rudolph Eichmann trial.
 And the LLM is giving these very satisfying answers.
 Again,
 it knows everything,
 understands nothing,
 so it falls on my shoulders to craft the interview in the direction that I want to take it.
 But it was quite the fun thing,
 and I'm like ...
 what?
 Should I copy it here?
 Nah,
 too much LLM slop.
 It's good slop,
 but still.
 It feels a bit like a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

write your own adventure
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 except more like a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

write your own Atlantic/NYRB article
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

:
 I ask the questions,
 and the replies are quite decent.
 So,
 more like an interview.
 Conversations with interesting people.
 I drive,
 but the fountain of info is dramatic.
 We talked about Kelley,
 Arendt,
 Eco;
 the LLM still thinks I want to talk about Goering and inkblots,
 so I will have to redirect some more.
 But this situation is curious.
 I created my own piece of custom journalism,
 for my own entertainment,
 and its entirely disposable.
 No record.
 (Well,
 I will save that page,
 the way I save other web pages.) But effectively,
 even more disposable than a newspaper.
 A journalist has the satisfaction that thousands or millions of readers read their story.
 The LLM cuts at the very base of that:
 it writes only for me.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OMG.
 All those people on twitter and bluesky – who do they write for?
 Other readers.
 Some seem to thrive on having a large readership.
 Some ego thing,
 some egocentric thing:
 everyone is hanging waiting for my next twitter post.
 Now,
 I have never–ever gotten an LLM to match the quality of social media,
 but it's not exactly far away.
 The recommendation algorithms remain terrible,
 at least for me:
 the recommendation algo for youtube feeds me endless pablum,
 driving me to doom scroll,
 looking for that one good post in that sea of mediocre.
 Maybe someday,
 it will get better.
 I have not yet told an LLM 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Here we are now,
 entertain us!
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 A mulatto,
 a mosquito.
 I wonder what that might be like.
 Intellectual masturbation?
 I ask the LLM anything,
 and it feeds my predilections?
 Will I get bored,
 and lose the thrill?
 Will I be carried to heights of ecstasy?
 I dunno,
 now I don't even want to try.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What's better,
 bluesky or a self-driven ride with an LLM?
 Both hover in there between being a waste of time,
 and being entertaining,
 being a way to relax and unwind,
 and being shallow dopamine hits.
 The new default mode for the brain.
 The psychological profile of the modern western mind entangled with the social media technologies,
 the algorithms,
 and now the LLM's,
 its a very curious and interesting and rocky psychological profile.
 I already sense that most people are mildly insane,
 I mean Rolling Stones had a song about 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

running for the shelter of mothers little helper
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and the movie 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Queens Gambit
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 features that prominently,
 and I get the impression most people lead their lives this way.
 Not quite some Tennessee Williams play about someone at the end of their rope,
 but common enough.
 Make America Great Again.
 Recapture purpose in life.
 And now,
 instead of phenobarbitol to ease the pain,
 its ...
 doom scrolling.
 It all feels very unstable to me.
 All very psychologically edgy.
 Humankind,
 where goest thou?
 Is humanity the Niagra river,
 going over the Niagra Falls?
 Arguably,
 it always was,
 for the millennia of history that we have.
 But however many people died in the Hundred Years War,
 however many Huguenots perished,
 well,
 I feel like ...
 well,
 we have historical descriptions and explanations of that,
 and it can all be understood,
 in the sense that it does not threaten or disturb.
 The sky is not falling because of what happened with the Huguenots.
 The sky is falling due to the LLMs and the social media.
 This time it's different ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It's also 1AM so I should stop whipping myself into a frenzy.
 Apparently,
 I'm very good at intellectual masturbation:
 I don't need an LLM or social media to whip me into a frenzy;
 I can just visualize in my own mind,
 without any aides.
 Pornographic aids.
 Intellectual pornography.
 Well,
 maybe I should read about the Huguenots a bit more.
 Hmm.
 Good night.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh wait.
 There is nothing new under the sun.
 I prodded the LLM:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

who else works in this vein?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and I get:
 Robert Harris,
 Jonathan Littel,
 Laurent Binet,
 Kazuo Ishiguro,
 Gitta Sereny.
 Of course.
 I live in a big world,
 with millions of smart people.
 The Western-culture World has about 1 billion people,
 EU+US+parts-of-Asia,
 and um,
 five sigma of a billion is ...
 oh,
 a small number.
 A few hundred.
 Huh,
 Four sigma is 64K and three sigma is 3 million (half of which are three sigma below average IQ) Three sigma IQ is 145.
 Oh.
 I'm told that is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

profoundly gifted
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 So the Western World has 1.5 million 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

profoundly gifted
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 uhh,
 smart people,
 of whom half a dozen (or maybe even 5x more!) who explore the banality of evil.
 The psychology of that.
 Interesting.
 So,
 of course.
 I live in a big world.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I wrote that newspapers are disposable.
 But,
 oddly,
 it seems,
 so is everything.
 We can single out things,
 here,
 and there,
 and attempt to save and cherish,
 but all is fleeting,
 at some timescale or another,
 however deeply affected we are just right now.
 Earlier today,
 I read some email missives from David Chapman,
 something about Varayana and Dogzhen,
 however one spells that,
 and it got me wondering what it is that makes people chase spiritual enlightenment.
 I suppose that,
 in the end,
 it is mentally healthier than phenobarbitol.
 But still.
 It's all very perplexing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm sitting here,
 waiting for some insight.
 I'm not getting any.
 I guess I chase intellectual enlightenment,
 rather than spiritual enlightenment.
 Because,
 I guess,
 the intellectual domain is more concrete,
 more grounded than the spiritual domain.
 I am not yet a vaporous spirit,
 ready to fly free like a piece of gauze in the wind.
 To visit the spiritual realm as a trail of smoke hanging through the nebulosity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To repeat a mantra 108 times seems like some sort of mental suicide.
 But to row 108 perfect rowing strokes:
 well,
 that's about 1K and will take you across the finish line in a race.
 Why is it one for me and not the other?
 Surely not 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

different strokes for different folks
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
26 April 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Write this email about AI safety:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Peter's reply seems reasonable.
 I suggest an approach inspired from biology and sociology.
 It is necessarily multi-layered.
 Let me draw an analogy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
* Police forces patrol and protect against individual criminals,
 engaged in a vast variety of crimes and misdemeanors.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
* The FBI tackles problems too big for local police forces.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
* A standing army protects the nation state.
 The army is (should be) rarely or never active;
 but the CIA (and NSA) (and State Dept) do most of the actual work.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
* At the other end:
 our bodies have an immune system protecting us against bacterial invaders.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
* We have medical doctors for those issues that our bodies cannot handle on their own.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
* Careful analysis of the immune system reveals a multi–layered,
 structured,
 fractal defense system,
 with various systems being either slow,
 or exponentially fast response systems.
 Some bacterial infections are conquered by massively out–producing the bacteria:
 spawning two white blood cells for every one new bacterium.
 Exponentially doubling.
 In the military,
 they call this the "Lanchester square law collapse".
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There won't be one super–massive AI/AGI/LLM,
 there will be many.
 Some will be large,
 some small.
 Some will be highly organized (like our bodies composed of cooperating parts:
 skin,
 muscles,
 bones) while others are only loose confederations (like mold growing on a tree stump).
 Small systems (e.g.
 some AI embedded in your electric meter) will have millisecond response times;
 but they will be far too stupid to be "loving" or "maternal" in the way mammals (or birds) are.
 They could still be dangerous,
 anyway.
 We will have to monitor them.
 The big–giant systems ...
 well,
 they are slower but far more powerful.
 I guess Hinton and others think exclusively of these large systems,
 but fail to fully encompass the intermediate–size,
 intermediate–scale systems.
 I mean,
 I have a frigging mid–range/high–endish GPU in my desktop computer,
 and could unleash a rather slow and primitive,
 but entirely dangerous system;
 nothing stops me (but my own conscience).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Also:
 the danger is not just AI's;
 but human–AI combos.
 I'm reading Umberto Eco's "Cemetery of Prague" and it's a portrait of cold,
 casual,
 disinterested evil at the end of the 19th century:
 Simoninis does it for the money;
 otherwise,
 he just does not really care about the harm that he does.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In short:
 human bodies and human societies have multi–layered multi–fractal hierarchical defenses.
 We'll need the same for AI.
 I have not even seen discussions of such ideas,
 much less plans.
 Maybe in the cybersecurity industry.
 I don't know.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
-- Linas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
On Sun,
 Apr 26,
 2026 at 3:33 PM 'Peter Solomon' via Lifeboat
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Foundation Advisory Boards <lifeboat-advisory-boards@googlegroups.com>
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
wrote:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
26 April 2026 earlier/later
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Talked to Michael Heller (socioprophet) by phone.
 The call helped clarify an earlier issue I was struggling with:
 translation between representational forms.
 Three examples,
 from narrowest to broadest.
 The narrow one was to translate Atomese so that it would run on a GPU.
 This is achievable (with difficulty) by writing a specialized compiler,
 but these seems like a poor solution.
 Another example is translating between datasets in Atomese,
 SQL,
 GraphQL or whatever DB.
 Automatically/transparently.
 Another example is stack adoption.
 I'm speaking to several people;
 they have their own software stacks;
 they will never use mine.
 But also,
 I will not use theirs,
 for various technical and provincial reasons.
 Yet the need to translate/ intercommunicate exists.
 I guess I need models of these stacks,
 to perform translations.
 I can take the cellular,
 sensori–motor approach:
 these are data silos,
 software stacks;
 I need to think of them as isolated and distinct entities,
 and I need to find a way of talking to them,
 translating between them.
 I've blargled with this kind of task in the past,
 with several semi–successful but not terribly ambitious implementations in the past.
 This paragraph is a note–to–self reminder that I need to take another shot at this.
 Its still a hard problem,
 taken in the full,
 but perhaps I am wiser now,
 and could brainstorm some more.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
27 April 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My letter to Amir (extract):
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As I explained long ago,
 I can map generic hypergraphs to link–grammar,
 and back again.
 And,
 as I explained long ago,
 I view the link–grammar parser–codebase as a kind of optimized layer for doing hypergraph processing.
 That's the general idea.
 The practice has proven to be more difficult.
 Where shall I begin?
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
– Of course,
 the concept of jigsaws is insanely generic:
 what's connected to what is fundamental.
 Biochemsitry is all about proteins that fit together,
 or don't.
 The individual reactions in the Krebs cycle are clearly jigsaw pieces.
 In economics,
 one can do the same with the inputs and outputs of factories.
 I recently digitized very old family photographs (100,
 150 years old),
 stuck them on the LDS genealogy website,
 and discovered that a lot of genealogy proceeds as a jigsaw puzzle assembly:
 these two people have the same name,
 they are born on the same day,
 in the same city,
 and the mothers name is the same.
 Ergo,
 they must be the same person.
 You can attach the connectors.
 What's curious about this process is that often,
 the match is incomplete:
 some names are missing,
 mis–spelled.
 Some dates are off.
 Yet,
 there is other circumstantial or indirect evidence:
 the mothers maiden name is the same.
 So there is a certain confidence of matching;
 the confidence is driven by evidence,
 similar to court–room/police–detective evidence.
 At any rate,
 experiences like this provides the primary driver,
 the conviction that "this is the right way".
 That everything is made of connectors and disjuncts.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
– I think I showed you a paper where I explain how link–grammar concepts can be applied to vision and sound processing.
 If not,
 let me know.
 Last year,
 I thought I would sit down and vibe–code this,
 should be "easy enough".
 But first,
 as a trial run,
 a generic sensori–motor infrastructure,
 loosely envisioned as "here are some connector tabs,
 on which some information can flow in",
 and "here are some connector tabs,
 which move things (location,
 position,
 view direction,
 attention)" and I would use link–grammar style rules,
 if not link grammar directly,
 to connect them up.
 Rather than vision or sound,
 I picked the filesystem as a domain:
 I can "view" directory contents and file metadata,
 and I can "move" from directory to directory.
 I coded that up,
 it works.
 I then tried to write down precise connector and disjunct rules.
 This is possible,
 but becomes verbose,
 tedious,
 boring,
 error prone.
 Somehow this needs to be automated.
 I have ideas for this,
 but ...
 well,
 this email is long enough.
 Meta–issues and meta–solutions pop into mind,
 and exploring each of these seems intractable.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
– A completely different project was the idea of making Atomese run natively on GPU's.
 The brute force solution is to code (to vibe–code) a compiler.
 (from Atomese,
 to GPU) It's hard,
 but doable:
 the path is clear,
 compiler technology is generally understood.
 But brute–forcing is so ..
 unappealing.
 Inelegant.
 What I'd like to do is to have a machine description of the GPU,
 represented as a metagraph,
 a machine description of the fabric (the bus,
 the bandwidth) represented as a metagraph,
 and then,
 some rewrite rules to morph a code base from one target architecture (e.g.
 the CPU) to the other (the GPU).
 So,
 something that is like a dynamic compiler,
 able to move from one representation to another.
 The sensori–motor ideas,
 built on the link–grammar conception of jigsaws,
 seems like the right conceptual foundation.
 The difficulty of describing the individual disjuncts needed for such transformations is overwhelming.
 Again,
 this needs automation.
 Again,
 there are more meta-issues,
 and meta-solutions,
 and they all spiral out of control.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
– Here's a version of the above that you might enjoy.
 Write down the pseudo–code for the LG parser algo.
 Convert this pseudocode into a hypergraph;
 from the hypergraph,
 figure out what the connectors and disjuncts are.
 So now you have that algo,
 expressed as if it was assembled from smaller computational pieces–parts.
 Now,
 these pieces–parts can be converted to ...
 C,
 C++,
 Java,
 python ..
 or to run in GPU.
 The performance would be terrible;
 most optimizations would be lost.
 But the idea that there is some metagraph that expresses algorithms becomes exposed.
 That metagraph can be retargeted to different compute fabrics.
 But since that metagraph is built up out of disjuncts,
 we have infrastructure for working with it.
 This seems like a worthy project.
 It's sufficiently limited in scope to maybe be doable,
 but sufficiently broad to expose key issues and draw attention and expand the state of the art.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
– Returning to Link Grammar directly and immediately,
 I very much like the idea of running it in the "generate" mode.
 But,
 where I last left it,
 there was a problem with combinatoric explosion.
 As you recall,
 I had connector sets numbering in the millions or more,
 and this does not scale.
 Part of the problem is that the link grammar parser algorithm exhaustively examines all possibilities.
 Somehow,
 this needs to be reigned in,
 with some sort of prioritization mechanism that narrows the search.
 It's easy to imagine solutions,
 but,
 as you know,
 almost all solutions seem to clash with the algo itself.
 Are there other solutions we have not thought of?
 Perhaps we should look at other algos?
 Perhaps we are just being stupid,
 and not seeing what is in front of us?
 I don't know.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
– This last part is ultimately experimental,
 not theoretical.
 You wrote code,
 I ran experiments,
 things blew up here or there,
 these got fixed,
 then the next round of experiments.
 But there need to be experiments lined up:
 some target,
 some goal to make something work.
 I'm a bit at a loss,
 for now.
 The meta–meta–meta–issues ate my lunch.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
-- One issue was the language–learning experiment.
 It was batched,
 and the batching pipeline was fragile and hard to manage.
 It felt like doing laundry:
 I would baby–sit the job – for days – until something blew up,
 fix that,
 and restart it.
 Or maybe like watching paint dry.
 Tedious.
 So I decided to redesign this as a dynamic system,
 which lead me down to the idea of sensori-motor agents crawling over a file system,
 ingesting text,
 parsing it,
 and (of course) those sensori–motor agents would be described as,
 composed of jigsaws – of course,
 cause the whole idea is that its "jigsaws all the way down".
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Where does this leave things?
 It would seem I've tackled an overwhelmingly large project,
 and link–grammar sits off to the side:
 conceptually and fundamentally important,
 but marooned for the moment.
 I've been muddling my way through the meta–issues above.
 Should you work on link–grammar?
 Yes.
 Would I love to see patches and enhancements?
 Yes.
 Will your work have a disinterested user base of approximately zero users?
 For now,
 that seems inevitable.
 Everyone is astounded by LLM's,
 and things like LG seem irrelevant for that crowd.
 There are very few who are thinking about symbolic alternatives to LLM's,
 and those that are,
 I think they are wrestling with meta–issues similar to what I describe above.
 LG itself does not yet have the breadth and depth and power to rescue the situation,
 to attract attention.
 It could,
 I think,
 but this is more of a daydream.
 Of course,
 there is some old Buddhist saying:
 a journey of a thousand miles begins with one step.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Linas.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
27 April 2026 Later
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm famous!
 https://halluworld.kessel.media/posts/pst_84bb799badbe442189b3f5c6dd15962e/jeffrey-epstein-lhomme-qui-voulait-une-machine-a-mentir
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
29 April 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Short note.
 Perhaps by writing it down,
 I won't forget.
 Put it on my TODO list of things to work on.
 It goes like this:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Some years ago I wrote a paper saying that CCG (combinatorial categorial grammar) is identical to LG (link grammar).
 And this is mostly true.
 In that paper,
 I gave a formal correspondence for some 90% of the features in both.
 An isomorphism,
 of sorts.
 Then I noted,
 at the end,
 the remaining 10% of the isomorphism.
 one has multiple choices.
 One can complete the mapping several ways,
 having pros and cons to each.
 Most or all of these completions were not entirely satisfying,
 and there was not any one choice that towered over the rest.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At the time that I wrote that text,
 this irked me.
 A week or two ago,
 it shot into my head that this situation resembled various cases in mathematics,
 where some sort of morphism or some homotopy is blocked by some sort of (global) structure.
 And that this blockage is important:
 the sphere is not homotopic to a torus.
 This is not an annoyance,
 but the symptom of something fundamental.
 So perhaps here,
 too.
 Perhaps I should go back and quantify the failure to align.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A lot of what I talk (think) about in AI/AGI research has to do with representations:
 how can I represent structures and relations observed in the exterior world?
 To what degree are different representations isomorphic,
 and when are they not?
 Representations,
 at the level of algebraic statements,
 at the level of lambda calculus,
 at the level of axioms and inference rules,
 can generally be homotopically transformed into one–another.
 Except when they cannot.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
From the software point of view,
 I want to have two things:
 a general algorithm that will perform homotopic deformations from one representation to another,
 and a different algorithm that will show when this is not possible,
 and why.
 For example,
 say I have some code written in C++,
 and I want to port it to Java.
 One way to accomplish this is to use the Atomese as the intermediate representation,
 and have compilers from Atomese to Java,
 and a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

disassembler
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 from C++ to Atomese.
 This is a bit brute–force,
 but it should work.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
More abstractly,
 I want to morph structure perceived by the sensory system into any one of a number of different Atomese formats.
 Atomese has no preferred representational form;
 there are many that are possible.
 They're generally interchangable,
 and one can morph on representation to another.
 Except when one can't.
 I want to get a handle on that variability,
 and control it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If you don't understand the previous paragraph,
 here is a concrete example.
 If one has some C code,
 one can compile it with –O0,
 –O2 and –O3 flags,
 each providing a different amount of optimization.
 The functional results are the same.
 The performance is not.
 Register assignments and assembly code is radically different.
 The compiler can guarantee the homotopic equivalence of the optimized and non–optimized versions of the assembly,
 because it is applying a large collection of graph rewrite rules to perform each optimization,
 in turn.
 Now,
 if one wanted to be perverse,
 one could generate billions of equivalent binaries,
 identical in function but differing in assembly,
 by simply choosing to randomly apply each optimization,
 or not,
 at that one location where it could be applied.
 This would generate a combinatoric explosion of possibilities.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Compiler people would never do this,
 because it's insane.
 They have one goal:
 make the code run as fast as possible,
 period.
 For Atomese,
 there's no sch principle.
 Sure,
 we want the representation to be small,
 and use less RAM.
 But we also want to be able to apply various operations to it,
 or perhaps perform queries on it,
 and this requires a non–minimal graph.
 Perhaps the Atomese represents an algorithm,
 and we want to vectorize it.
 Doing so almost surely requires massive rewrites and blow–ups of the graphical representation of that algorithm.
 Transformation from one form to another may require a lot of morphing.
 I want to have a better grasp of the general theory of doing this.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I want to look at collections of such transformations as a dynamical system.
 I want to think about all possible transformations at once,
 all possible morphological changes...
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Grr.
 As I write these words,
 these ideas all seem so shallow and obvious and useless.
 I mean,
 I think its fun to think about this,
 and its fun to implement and explore them in Atomese,
 but none of this solves any specific economically important problem that would light up the interests of venture capitalists,
 or be celebrated by technology geeks,
 or by scientists as some sort of magic,
 majestic breakthrough.
 So its my little sandbox of seemingly pointless games.
 But,
 but ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 shit.
 Have to break for dinner.
 Dinner is being served with white wine,
 so I may not be coherent after this.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
–
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 Four hours later.
 There is an old nagging issue with Atomese that I have to face.
 For many years,
 I have been driven to implement everything in Atomese.
 Sometimes stray from that path;
 Atomese is very idiosyncratic.
 Every now and then I stray from this path.
 I say to myself:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

oh,
 it's time to rejoin the ranks of convention
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 I tried to do the file sys archival project in python.
 The first draft was hand–coded.
 I think I got help from Claude in one of the later drafts?
 Maybe not?
 Anyway,
 it was crash and burn.
 After a while,
 I was like 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

why the fuck am I struggling working around stupid python limitations and idiotic python API's,
 when I could be doing it in Atomese?
 It would be so much easier.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 The prodigal son returns home.
 This is not the first time,
 either.
 Every time I set out to explore the world outside of Atomese,
 I end up getting crushed by the utter stupidity and the non–operability of popular,
 widely–adopted,
 industry–standard API's.
 Why the fuck does anyone want to code like that?
 I mean,
 I know why,
 its kind of a rhetorical question:
 if you want to build some narrow,
 focused application meeting some narrow,
 focused user requirements,
 and it's carved in stone and does not need to be refactored ever,
 then sure,
 code in Java or python or c++ or whatever.
 Its fast,
 easy,
 ordinary programmers know this stuff,
 documentation is easy to find,
 and you'll have your monolithic,
 immutable,
 permanent static dull cut–n–dried app on time and under–budget.
 Go for it.
 But the stuff I keep trying to do,
 that approach is entirely inadequate.
 I got to Atomese over two decades because I tried the rest,
 and frankly,
 it all sucked.
 Atomese has been my attempt to create a non–suck programming environment.
 Somewhat dishearteningly,
 it has a user–base of one.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This still feels like the right direction,
 even though I am incredibly conflicted over it.
 However,
 but,
 and this is a big but:
 I'm wondering if the arrival of LLMs like Claude changes everything.
 I created Atomese because I wanted a clean surface,
 clean internals.
 I created Atomese because I was experimenting with basic comp sci ideas.
 Twiddling with AI,
 and up till about 2000,
 AI was more about data structures than it was about algorithms.
 Famous AI scientists will vehemently disagree.
 I see why:
 stick to traditional programming languages,
 and the algorithm is everything.
 Move to Atomese,
 the data representation is everything,
 the algorithm comes along for the ride.
 The data moves,
 transforms,
 its a dynamical system.
 The algorithm is just another dynamical mutation of the data structure;
 one of many,
 billions,
 and uncountable number of possible dynamical transmutations of the data.
 Algorithms are like swirls in the river,
 but what makes a river is the water,
 the data,
 not the swirls.
 I guess I'm physics–coded.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Consider,
 for example,
 measure–preserving dynamical systems.
 The reason they are measure–preserving is because this is a reasonable model of baryon number conservation.
 The total number of atoms in an industrial mixing vat is conserved;
 its measure–preserving.
 The physics of that mixing and stirring has to do with moving those atoms around.
 The mathematics has to do with dynamical systems that model such mixing and stirring.
 (Foot–note,
 aside:
 it suddenly occurs to me I've never seen a formal definition of a system with a chemical potential.
 That is one writes expressions like 
\begin_inset Formula $T^{-1}\left(A\cap B\right)$
\end_inset

 and even 
\begin_inset Formula $\mu\left(T^{-1}\left(A\right)\right)=\mu\left(A\right)$
\end_inset

 for the measure 
\begin_inset Formula $\mu$
\end_inset

 but how would this work if one had multiple measures for different chemically reacting substances?
 For some reason,
 I've never seen that!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm going to indulge myself for a moment,
 and ask an LLM about this.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Bleh.
 Everything I do only increases the size of my to–do list.
 I asked Claude,
 it pointed at three things:
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
The Kubo–Martin–Schwinger (KMS) condition for a one–parameter subgroup of a symmetry group,
 consisting of time translation and gauge transformations.
 The KMS condition is effectively the algebraic abstraction of the Gibbs state.
 ...
 The algebraic/KMS approach to chemical potential is known but somewhat obscure outside of C*-algebra / quantum statistical mechanics circles
\emph default
.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 OK.
 This is worth at least a short refresher.
 I have ADHD so 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

short
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 here means less than a few hours or less than a day;
 otherwise my eyes glaze over.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The Sinai–Ruelle–Bowen (SRB) measure for dissipative,
 non–equilibrium systems.
 It notes:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
The sums of Lyapunov exponents determine fluctuations of the entropy production rate in the SRB state.
 ...
 There are two measures:
 Lebesgue/Liouville as the reference measure,
 and SRB as the physical invariant measure.
 Their Radon–Nikodym derivative doesn't exist (since SRB is singular w.r.t.
 Lebesgue),
 which is the mathematical signature of dissipation and entropy production.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Huh.
 OK.
 This also deserves a half–day or full day of study.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\series bold
\emph on
The contact geometry approach
\series default
.
 For thermodynamic systems with dissipation,
 standard statistical mechanics of conservative systems relies on symplectic geometry of phase space.
 For a class of nonconservative systems stemming from contact geometry,
 one can find generalized Hamilton's equations,
 a Liouville theorem,
 and microcanonical and canonical measures invariant under the contact flow.
 Remarkably,
 this canonical measure has a power–law density distribution with respect to the standard contact volume form.
 Contact geometry is the odd–dimensional cousin of symplectic geometry and naturally includes thermodynamic variables —
 temperature,
 entropy —
 as coordinates.
 This is a serious research program,
 not a curiosity.
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 I copied this verbatim from Claude,
 because there's little to improve on in the phrasing,
 and I'll need the full reminder.
 I look at contact geometry every now and then (hello,
 torsion!) but need a refresher.
 The sentence 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

has a power–law density distribution
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 caught my attention and made me stop.
 This probably deserves much more than a few days worth of study,
 but how will I carve that time out?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK.
 That's enough for the late–night day–dreaming.
 There was one more thing that caught my eye:
 The New York Times Magazine,
 26 April 2026,
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

On Language
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 by Dan Brooks.
 This sentence fired up my imagination:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\emph on
While it is true that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

–coded
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 lets us make a connection without specifying what that connection actually is,
 it also lets us express what is felt but cannot be demonstrated logically – a legitimate and perhaps increasingly important category of relation in an environment that ruthlessly converts experience into words and then some...
\emph default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 This caught my attention precisely because it touches on my ruminations on homomorphic transmutations,
 above,
 but here,
 at a very abstract level:
 the conversion of feelings into words.
 This is a creative act:
 fishing feelings and impressions,
 and turning them into sentences.
 LLM's do not have feelings,
 at least,
 not in the mammalian sense;
 there may be some crypto–something in those weight matrices,
 which are fished to construct grammatically correct sentences and the reverberation that rings out after the plucking of a violin string ahem prompt.
 The reverb is ghostly and feels human–ish.
 But actual humans appear to not only be stuck in the here–and–now,
 but the conversion of vague feelings into concrete thoughts is our stock in trade.
 So when I talk about the homotopic deformations,
 this is what I think of:
 what is this process of converting feelings,
 or perhaps sensory organ inputs,
 into awareness of a situation?
 And what is this process of working in awareness,
 in consciousness,
 and forging sentences and action plans and movements?
 That's the nature of this transmutational act?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well,
 that's supposed to be a rhetorical question:
 I already know the answer:
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

its jigsaws all the way down
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 And that Atomese is my current best attempt at working with jigsaws.
 This seems to be the correct framework,
 the correct Petri dish for growing dynamical systems that transform and transmute data with algorithms,
 and with treating algorithms as if they were data...
 My gut sense is that this is where it all comes together.
 It's all here.
 All the required ingredients are there.
 Just build the fucking thing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But then,
 lets not throw out the baby with the bathwater:
 the unity of experience and self–awareness in the here–and–now,
 this remains an utter mystery.
 I suspect its quantum;
 see my posting from a few weeks earlier.
 But hand–waving 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

its quantum
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 does little.
 I really really need to get a better grip on here–and–now,
 and that requires resuming the deep dive into the structure of the quantum vacuum,
 Unruh,
 and why Beckman bound is bits,
 and why Hawking radiation is entropy.
 And I still have no clue how to compute the entropy of a graph,
 never mind the entropy of a mathematical proof or an algebraic manipulation,
 or the entropy of any kind of symbolic flow.
 I guess symbolic dynamics is a place to start,
 but I don't know how to jump from symbolic dynamics to the dynamics of lambda calculus and beta reduction.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It is now 1AM and I have to stop.
 But perhaps its this:
 starting from textbook symbolic dynamics,
 I can compute an entropy.
 Then I convert the symbolic dynamics to jigsaws,
 and say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

ah hah the entropy of these two must be identical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 This gives me a way of writing down the entropy of one specific collection of jigsaws.
 Perhaps this will allow some insight that will expose the generalization of entropy to the general case?
 Hmm.
 That's like another great idea that deserves a day or two of attempts.
 I need more time.
 How will I ever find time to explore all the questions I ask?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
x
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
The End
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is the end of Part Ten–G of the diary.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
