#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "courier" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Language Learning Diary - Part Two
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
2021-present
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
The language-learning effort involves research and software development
 to implement the ideas concerning unsupervised learning of grammar, syntax
 and semantics from corpora.
 This document contains supplementary notes and a loosely-organized semi-chronol
ogical diary of results.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Part two of the diary on the language-learning effort starts with the new
 task of of closed loop learning.
 The idea of closed loop learning is that the accuraacy of the learned grammars
 can be very closely monitored and measured, thus allowing the learning
 algorithms to be tuned for speed and measured for accuracy.
 The closed loop is a basic three-step process:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Generating random but controlled grammars
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Generate a text corpus from these grammars
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Learn a new grammar from the corpus
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Compare the controlled-grammar to the learned-grammar
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Tune algorithms and procedures, and repeat.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The step-by-step instructions can be found in the directory 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

README-Calibration.md
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
February 2021
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Restart the project, finally making some headway.
 ToDo items:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Describe how the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

uniform random sampling of sentences
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is performed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Enable weighted random sampling of sentences.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Fix multi-sense bug in gen-dict.scm circa line 85
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
First run.
 Instructions in 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

README-Calibration.md
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Lots and lots of bugs fixed and lots of pipeline was automated.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
March 2021
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
First real experiment, in expt-7.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
