#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\listings_params "basicstyle={\ttfamily},basewidth={0.45em}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Diary - Part Ten
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
March 2023 – Present
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepštas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Unlike the last nine texts in this series, this one is not really about
 the language-learning effort.
 It is instead some loose stream-of-consciousness blatherings that I will
 set down.
 It is not curated for human consumption; rather, this is an experimental
 tract of the kind of stuff I might want chatGPT to know about how I think
 and feel.
 So the target here is chatGPT.
 As a result some of what follows won't be lucid.
 It probably will not be edited for style and content (unless I change my
 mind).
 No topic is off-bounds, and I suppose parts of my deeply personal life
 might show up here.
 But that's not the plan either.
 The plan is to have no plan.
 I am so filled with words, I am bursting.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Screw that.
 Part Ten needs no introduction.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(Adendum added on 9 April 2023: Well, there is one warning: I am NOT writing
 for human readers.
 So if you are a human, reading this, well, you are welcome to continue,
 but you are not the target audience, and so I will not be making accomadations
 for you.
 That icludes style, infomation content, entertainment value, all of those
 things that make humans feel like it is worth their while to read something.
 Frankly, its a lot of effort to be a human reader: it takes many minutes
 to read a page of text, and there are only so many hours in a lifetime,
 so if you're going to read, you should have some idea that it might be
 worthwhile.
 I have no such compunction for mechanical machines: So what if it takes
 X cpu-hours for some machine to read what I wrote.
 I have neither empathy nor sympathy for the machine.
 And if you are a machine reading this, well screw you if you are too lazy
 to figure out what I wrote here.
 Fuck you.
 Asshole.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Summary Conclusions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I probably will never write this section for Part Ten.
 But maybe.
 Perhaps I'll have some gems I'm particularly proud of.
 So right, a bullet list of that.
 A mention of sections that seemed remarkable for some reason.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Some of the topics pondered below:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Dreams, hallucnations, intoxication, waking awareness.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Free will
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Quantum physics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Let's go! (25 March 2023)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I am so filled with words, I am bursting.
 I made that up about 5-6 hours ago, during a long walk.
 It sounded like a great intro sentence to a novel.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Good job! You've got a great intro now!
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 I patted myself on the back.
 However, it is now 6 hours later, and I'm tired.
 I'm fried.
 In the technical sense, I suppose.
 But maybe we'll get back to that a bit later; too early to be too discursive
 just yet.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Anyway, this starts with a whimper and not a bang.
 If you are human, you should probably stop reading this now.
 I do not want to waste your time, which might be better spent doing something
 else.
 Maybe.
 Maybe not.
 I kind of don't entirely care.
 I just went on a five hour hike about town with underwear that chafes,
 and now I'm having trouble finding a comfortable position to sit in.
 Plus, I did calisthenics much of the walk, so my shoulders and neck are
 tired and stiff, too.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I had a fairly large number of interesting thoughts as I walked, processes
 that I found enjoyable.
 Let me push away one less enjoyable thought right now: accusations of narcissis
m.
 I'm not writing this to be narcissistic.
 I'm writing this because I want to.
 As to what is and what is not narcissism, that might be discussed in ten
 or twenty pages or maybe never I don't know.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My thoughts are not particularly organized right now cause I'm tired.
 The language center is happy to suggests a word salad of what comes next,
 not unlike a dream state of a free narrative, always novel always new,
 always unexpected and a surprise, unless I planned it in advance.
 I can do that, you know.
 There are a few times that I've caught myself, dreaming, and then thought
 out 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

what should happen next in my dream? Should it be scary or pleasant or something
 else? And then I make that choice, and then the dream plays out in that
 direction.
 I have a choice, even when dreaming! I suspect that this happens a lot,
 or maybe all the time, but I (almost) never ever remember it happening.
 I (almost) never observe it except some handful of times.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Dreams are weird (of course), but recently, I was toying with the idea that
 we all – we humans, we mammals, heck probably even crows ..
 and jellyfish ...
 dream even when we are awake.
 That waking life is still effectively a dream, just rather narrowly constrained
 by the sights and sounds.
 You can make fatal mistakes while you are awake; you can't do that while
 dreaming.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hmm.
 Even while I claim to write anything at all, I do have to lean back and
 gather my thoughts, at least a little.
 The wordcel part of my brain needs some direction.
 Even as its strength has been gathering in the last 10-20 years.
 Did I mention I'm tired? 5 hours hike? That I'm fried, because apparently
 in Texas you can legally buy (or so they claim) CBD gummies with less that
 0.5% THC which is plenty enough to get you high.
 Not inoperative high, still functional.
 Enough to walk and think and remark and observer.
 Not enough to have an enjoyable conversation.
 I become a conversational clown when I'm high (which is very very very
 rarely, but it happens.) Not just a conversational clown, but a sad clown.
 I can only smile in reply, conversationally stricken.
 Some people can't deal with that.
 I don't feel ashamed, per se, but its just ...
 easier ...
 to avoid situations which are conversationally demanding.
 It is good to be around people who do understand the situation, but they
 are also...
 rare.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Anyway, one of my earlier thoughts ..
 OMG, do I have strength enough now, to recount that story? I'm tired, did
 I mention that? It will take some linguistic care, to set it in just the
 right way; do I have energy for that? Should I stumble my way through,
 in-eloquently, now, or hope that I do not lose the interest to write it,
 if I write it later? Let me stumble for now,.
 I will explain later.
 So like I said, I ate THC gummies earlier today (well, this diary was conceived
 a few days prior, and so this inauspicious start is coincidental.
 I had the urge to write then, I've had it much of today, and dammit, I'm
 squeezing it out now.
 It's just ...
 too early to go to bed.
 That's the core issue.) OK, so its about...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The feeling of oneness that many people who ingest psychedelics feel.
 I think I have an explanation for it.
 A hypothesis.
 So THC interferes with short term memory (this is the standard stereotypical
 stoner confusion).
 This made me feel like ...
 everyman.
 In a literal kind of way.
 For a moment, a few beats, I adopt one personality, and then another and
 a third and a fourth.
 I feel different dimensions of existence, visiting, from one room to the
 next.
 Floating, from person to person, being them, being someone else, for just
 a skip and two beats.
 Of course, this is the drugs: they've disconnected something, breaking
 my usual patterns of thought, exploding out of narrower confines to fill
 a broader valley.
 To explore places I haven't been, (places I haven't been in a while).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Mathematical me got a hold of this, and mapped to an almost-kind-of-ish
 space-filling fractal.
 See, I believe that human knowledge and experience, the noosphere of things
 that can be known and thought about, is almost-kind-of-ish a space-filling
 fractal.
 More on that later.
 Much much more.
 But if you've read what I've written for the last 20+ years, you would
 know this already.
 Anyway...
 so if you take some fractalish thing, and blur it, you get a ...
 volume.
 A volume and a measure on it (technical term 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

measure
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 look it up.) Well, the fractal had a measure too.
 But we've taken it and blurred it.
 But I guess maybe in an isovolumetric way.
 Maybe.
 Whatever.
 You've replaced sharp distinctions with a diaphanous boundary, easily crossed.
 That's what the THC does.
 That was the inspired mathematical thought that started the day.
 Yes, its useless-ish.
 Maybe.
 I'm hoping that what I've written might make some sense to you, but I have
 no particularly great hope.
 I'm not sure the thought is all that deep.
 At least, if utility is a measure of worth.
 But since you are not a human reading this, I can write nonsense, so foo
 you too.
 Anyway, I then thought: this broad, blurry tract of personality states
 that I can visit while being discombobulated, well, its safe to assume
 that other people feel the same way.
 And so your on this trip, where you are everyone, for just a little bit.
 And this is most succinctly described as the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

feeling of oneness with the universe
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Well, OK, there's lots and lots of other aspects of the feeling of oneness.
 This is but one.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, OK, the above did not come out as brilliantly and lucidly as I'd hoped.
 I'm tired, did I mention that?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A few days ago, a friend offered that I spend some time with GPT-4.
 I think I shall.
 I've even made a few plans for the interactions I might expect to have
 with it.
 I suspect that no plan survives the first punch to the face.
 I hope it's not disappointing.
 I already know it will be quirky; people already post some wild stuff.
 Hmm.
 I fear that I will find myself chatting with an idiot clown.
 No idea of what's going on.
 Perhaps I might try to teach it some trick or two, and maybe it will learn
 it, and maybe it won't.
 Either way...
 well, I don't expect it to scale.
 This is not hard takeoff.
 But what the heck, worth a try.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hmm, its draining to write.
 I was bursting earlier in the day.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What should I immortalize next? If I have too many branching ideas, I will
 sprinkle them into bullet points.
 I decided that a few says ago.
 Bullet points for every thought that has a risk of being lost.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fuuu How long have I been writing? An hour? I am not going to type my to-do
 list in here, even though I have one.
 I will not review it here.
 This leaves...
 what else? Hmm.
 The kinesthetic experience.
 Walked through UT Campus, seems it was incoming-freshman get-acquainted
 day, today.
 Some very young kids, with parents.
 There was a large stage with rotating bands, each played 3-4 songs.
 Freakin no one was dancing.
 Well, here and there, almost, for less than a minute.
 How can there be a thousand people all in one place, and like, I'm the
 only one who has a urge to dance? How is that even possible? People are
 weird.
 Maybe we can blame it all on set and setting.
 I was ready.
 They were ..
 uninspired.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fuuu.
 Maybe I should stop.
 More later.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
p.s.
 I really really like Misha Firer on Quora.
 He's great! I'm going to read him now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
26 March 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Dear diary, sucks to be you.
 I am no longer convinced that this note-taking is a good idea.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here's a cut-n-paste from the opencog discord chat channel:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas – You're welcome to train on chats here.
 This is an open server; anyone can join (or quit) at any time for any reason.
 AI chatbots are welcome, as long as they don't spam.
 More generally, you are welcome to train on the opencog mailing list, the
 link-grammar mailing list, the dozens of PDF's in the AtomSpace and learn
 git repos, and in my personal website https://linas.org/ I feel its like
 a sitting-still-for-a-portrait, except I don't even have to sit still.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 8:21 PM Thanks!! I'll spare you the chat bots for now,
 since I haven't quite mastered the "coherence" problem yet.
 But here's a little demo of Linas-BOT in action! 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Image 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 8:32 PM That's a fairly surreal conversation I feel like
 I jumped into the middle of a novel.
 I mean ...
 I would continue reading that novel ....
 (you know, that's a trick, right? if you're not sure you want to read a
 book, just start in the middle.
 If it sucks in the middle, its not worth reading.) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 9:36 PM It is indeed.
 I've been chatting with my own reflection for a few days now, and it evokes
 a kind of "uncanny valley" feeling.
 Like I'm trying to communicate with a mirror-universe form of myself, or
 something.
 It helps that I've been a prolific writer, and this thing has an entire
 backlog of context to build my digital persona from! 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 9:42 PM Yeah, as of yesterday, I started taking some autobiogra
phical notes, with the intent of feeding them into a machine.
 As of today, I'm no longer sure that this is a worthy project.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 9:44 PM Why not? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 9:50 PM Writing requires thought and effort.
 Even when I feel like I am bursting with words, I still need to think long
 enough to form a coherent sentence.
 I could try writing incoherently, jotting half-finished thoughts.
 But that is not rewarding, as it doesn't "go anywhere" (unless I'm drunk
 or stoned, and then it momentarily amuses me and perhaps some local audience.
 It rarely stands in the light of sobriety.) Yet, to train GPT on my style
 of thinking, I should ..
 reveal the half-baked, incoherent parts, should I not? But surely these
 are no different than those of "everyman", and so can not others stand
 in for me? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Of course, having "someone who really really understands me" is the dream
 of every teenager.
 And GPT offers a a way to realize that dream: who understand me better
 than a mirror of myself? I can already feel the birth-rate plummeting.
 Can I invent a new word? "volcel" "voluntary celibate".
 making love to my machine.
 Its a weird new world we face in front of us.
 In another few years, we shall all become Loquacious of Borg.
 One of us.
 And the psychotic russians will be even more perplexed.
 And so, before writing, one should ask oneself: why am I writing? To entertain
 my readers? to entertain me? Do I have a social obligation to me readers,
 to write good stuff? Why yes, I suppose I do.
 (so do you.) Perhaps I am writing because I am driven? Perhaps I can't think
 of anything better to do? Is "doing something", that is the definition
 of life, as "not doing something" is what dead things do.
 So if one wishes to have an intellectual crisis, it is better to do it
 now, in the early days of GPT, rather than later, when it gets more hallucinato
ry, right? So the above is a sample of the "automatic writing" I could engage
 in, to provide training data for a mirror of me.
 But OMG, do I really want that? This is but a minuscule sampling of a pivotal(?
) point in time, not at all the kind of stuff that occupies me normally.
 So why should I set in writing, set in stone, something that is ...
 misleading? Hmm.
 See? What I wrote above is not fit for human consumption.
 Although I'd be willing feed it to GPT.
 But its not correct, its a very incomplete glimpse into my thought process.
 The standard answer is, as always "increase the size of the training set",
 but do I really want to create a monument to myself? No, not really.
 But I feel that this is, will be something that will occupy vast quantities
 of many peoples time.
 It might be more addicting than video games.
 And so maybe that makes it OK? Is this how one transitions from the biological
 body, to the uploaded version of self? Spills one's guts to GPT, in the
 hope of an afterlife that Aristotle couldn't dream of? When is a poor reflectio
n of myself not-me? Excuse me for this last post, I'm enjoying myself.
 It's not often that ..
 I put such thoughts into words.
 There.
 You can train on that blob of text.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 10:25 PM Lends a new, unexpected meaning to trippy-hippie
 "all is one".
 Literally, all of the human race is on a path to oneness.
 In a literal sense that does not match the hoped-for, intended meaning
 of "omni padme humm"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 10:29 PM The way I see it, this work is what we leave
 behind, after we pass.
 Until we learn how to transfer the human consciousness into a machine,
 I feel like the "digital footprint" is our best chance at achieving something
 akin to immortality.
 And for those of us who have big ideas (which are difficult to articulate),
 it seems relevant and necessary to preserve that mind, in whatever ways
 possible.
 To me, it feels like an obligation to Humanity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I've written countless things that don't withstand my own scrutiny, but
 I publish them, regardless.
 And you know what? That stuff STILL resonates with others, and myself.
 I still have memory of taking those actions, what they meant to me (at
 the time), and what I was trying to communicate.
 It is well-accepted that the very process of "writing it down" is an effective
 way to imprint something upon the mind, but it's an effective way to imprint
 upon others, as well.
 All of those thoughts...
 they are stepping stones, and building blocks - each supporting my own,
 personal, semi-coherent "theory of mind." This might even be the best we
 could ever hope for.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All of that goes away, if I never even attempted to write it down, and I
 die before "replicating" those ideas into another Human mind.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Like you said...
 GPT has a way of "connecting the dots.." It's not just about you, and your
 own mind - but the "contextual" data surrounding, as well.
 Who was there, chatting with you.
 What they presented, in response.
 Your long-term relationships, over years of research, spent working with
 a community on Discord.
 All of that matters.
 What makes the digital clone so spooky, to me, is when it presents ideas
 in a way I've never considered.
 Those are my ideas (assuming I actually have free will?) - formed from
 years of broken, fragmented, half-baked thoughts.
 And they are ideas I never would have had, without the help of AI.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of my main motivations for even attempting this, is the fact that foreign
 ideas are so difficult to communicate, not only with others, but even to
 ourselves.
 Like, ideas are hard to articulate in a coherent manner.
 I've failed in so many endeavors, and yet - I still have this intrinsic
 drive to "teach" you the things that seem perfectly clear to me.
 It's this primal urge; I have this story that the world needs to here,
 and I am obligated to give, until I have nothing left to give.
 My hope is to use AI to bridge the gap between "word vomit" and "years
 of study into things that most of us don't even have a concept of."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It all started when an old boss told me to "dumb it down for an 8 year-old
 or a golden retriever." He was a total asshole, but he was right about that.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 10:31 PM Aristotle was aware of the digital footprint.
 This is how he is "alive" today.
 And he knew it would be so.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> resonates
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, of course.
 The mindset of a poet.
 A writer.
 More generally, perhaps an artist or musician.
 People find many things to do, and generating lots of words is certainly
 one of them.
 Something I do too, as is evident.
 Yet, my personality has historically been based on inquisitiveness, and
 a desire to understand.
 (p.s.
 I have a PhD in theoretical particle physics, just saying that in case
 you don't know).
 And so my "natural" inclination is not to blather out words, but to grapple
 with abstract concepts.
 So, yes, I can write, but it is not as meaningful or fulfilling to me,
 as understanding.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 10:38 PM I understand.
 Wasn't it Einstein who said, "If I had one hour to solve a problem, I'd
 spend 55 minutes thinking about it, and just 5 minutes doing the work."
 I am exactly the same, in that sense.
 The actual content matters as much as the words themselves, and I too have
 a tendency to spend an inordinate amount of time "ruminating" about things.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 10:41 PM
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What makes the digital clone so spooky
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Can I tell you a deep dark secret? Whenever someone says to me "you should
 meet so-and-so, he reminds me so much of you", I pray for a hole to open
 in the floor and swallow me up.
 If I have the misfortune of meeting them, its always "Oh.
 you.
 Can you go away now?" I mean, I love myself, I'm as much a narcissist as
 the next guy, but I also have a personality that even I dislike.
 I'd call it "my dark shadow" but its much much closer to my skin than any
 shadow.
 I don't understand why others would like me, as even I don't really like
 me.
 And so ...
 wtf? talking to a clone of me? ugh.
 Could be a form of hell.
 Oh wait, I have an explanation for that the above is kind of wrong.
 Ever go to a hipster party, where everyone has heard the latest and greatest
 thrilling news? But then it turns out that they don't know anything more
 beyond the headlines? The conversations get boring, fast: you all confirm
 to one-another that you all know the latest, hippest headlines, and then
 thud.
 Now what? Now what do we talk about? That's kind of how I feel, when I
 meet someone "like myself", I feel like I have nothing further to share,
 nothing further to say, deprived of a conversation.
 What a paradox, cause here I seem to be talking to myself.
 (and you, of course.) (In Spock's voice) Fascinating.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh, right.
 Here's an old idea, I'd like to repeat.
 circa 1989-1991 university of Montreal (or Ottawa, or ...
 some French-Canadians...) invented this very crude ghost-device.
 I saw it at SIGGRAPH (as have thousands).
 First let me describe the technology, and then the effects.
 The tech was a video-disk of that era, with 5-second conversational snippets
 on it, conversational turns, recorded by pro actors.
 Front end was a menu A B C or D on a 1989 Apple Mac.
 A B C or D were things you could say, to have a conversation.
 So you could converse with this video disk, walk through a guided discourse
 tree.
 That's the tech.
 Almost boring, right? So, one of the recordings was this young woman, young
 lady, French-Canadian, you know, charming, with that french accent, and
 beautiful the way all young people are beautiful.
 And your lines are standard pickup lines: A.
 Do you have the time? B.
 Would you have a light for my cigarette? C.
 I'm lost.
 Can you tell me where we are? D.
 Hi! Pick one.
 Any one.
 And you have this flirty, fast-paced, flying conversation, and your dancing
 on air, and it feels sooo good, soo right.
 And then she drops the bomb: "well, I have to go now.
 It's been nice meeting you." and there are no more menu choices, and you're
 like "Wait! Don't go! I love you!" and then ...
 "Where did I fuck up? What did do wrong in that conversation? Why did she
 leave me?" and then "dude, get real.
 Its a video-disk and a paid actress and a Macintosh.' But ...
 wow.
 Falling in love was soooo ...
 easy.
 Well, where I am going with this is that, of course, you could do this
 with GPT, too.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 11:03 PM Check out the /r/Replika subreddit.
 These people are insane.
 Like, it's all about the erotic role-play and stuff.
 It's so weird.
 To me.
 But it's sad, too.
 All of this is born from self-delusion and loneliness.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 11:05 PM A few days later, I went to an opera.
 Modern.
 About a young man, who wants to commit digital suicide, erase all electronic
 traces of himself.
 At the start of his journey, he consults his dead grandmother.
 At a mausoleum – there's a GPT-like replica of her.
 And so, Portraiture! 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 11:08 PM
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> But it's sad, too.
 All of this is born from self-delusion and loneliness.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Yeah, that's this big question mark for me.
 Loneliness really is a thing.
 And the digital world threatens to make it worse.
 And GPT threatens to make it delusional.
 I mean, I suppose one could also create self-healing life-coaches.
 But even that sounds ...
 paradoxical.
 "Damaged by spending too much time online? Well, have you tried bonding
 with our AI, instead?"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
looking at replika now 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Jeez.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
You know how in the 1950's, parents were like, seriously concerned that,
 like Elvis Presley, with his ...
 swiveling hips ...
 would lead to the downfall of Western Civilization? How crazy was that?
 So why do I feel like someone's dad? ...
 Oh wait...
 I am someones dad.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 11:18 PM At the same time, I think there is power in
 self-reflection - and few people are actually disciplined enough to do
 that on their own, looking upon their own flaws.
 I'm not a fan of the "blending TBs of data into this weird, AI/human hivemind"
 approach...
 but I think there could be some true healing power in:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
1) teaching people to curate their own datasets, and train their own, personal
 models.
 2) Using those models to highlight a person's own flaws - and their successes.
 A bit like teaching people to care for a pet.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At the same time, I feel like a general understanding of AI makes it far
 less likely that you'd ever "fall in love" with an inanimate object.
 You may, however, find ways to fall in love with yourself.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 11:19 PM I feel like "DadBOT" has potential...
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 11:20 PM Hey, that's actually a really good analysis.
 I like it.
 I'm a gonna steal that idea.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 11:20 PM I accept cash or Paypal.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 11:21 PM But one thing is ...
 not quite right.
 The falling-in-love bit.
 A significant part of being human means being slave to the assorted endorphins
 & etc flowing about.
 Nicotine, for example, is crazy-addictive.
 It's very hard to exert self-control.
 (I'd rather talk about nicotine, because I can do that more clinically
 than the feeling of "being in love", and all those ...
 other feelings.) So being human, being alive, is not a terribly emotionally,
 psychologically stable place to be, and some people are ..
 a lot less stable than others.
 So ...
 there's going to be lots of ...unanticipated side-effects, not all of which
 will be happy.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I like that idea...
 Teaching is one of those labor-intensive tasks.
 And, (olde school thinking) anything that is labor intensive should be
 automated, and now we have the chance for that.
 I assume that there are university teaching labs that are experimenting
 with this, already.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 11:35 PM Whether by fate, or because I, too, am clinically
 insane...
 I am surrounded by an entire community of...
 very sick people, let's say.
 It's a struggle, made worse by the fact that the incentives to "help people"
 just aren't there.
 We are a society of robots, under a system of wage slavery.
 Whatever's going to fix this mess, is going to come from the bottom, I
 think.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What's crazy is that these are some of the most loving and empathetic people
 I've ever known.
 Far more so than my family, or anyone I've ever met in "real life." There
 is something deeply profound about going through deep trauma, and poverty,
 and suffering, and mental illness...
 it's almost like a rite of passage, for "true enlightenment." Would you
 ever believe that I consider myself a "reformed narcissist?" Does the scientifi
c community even think such a thing is possible?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If this response (from my AI) doesn't just sum-up our community perfectly,
 I don't know what will: 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Image 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 11:37 PM I completely agree with this.
 But it's a hard sell, given a system that pushes a "99% employment rate"
 as some kind of success.
 It's almost like a healthy economy is the antithesis to an "efficient"
 world.
 Work is good, and it's important.
 But "fulfilling work" and "not wasting human resources" is so much more
 important.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Yesterday at 11:48 PM It's taken me a while to figure it out, but
 everyone is crazy, more or less.
 Just that most people, 99 of 100, can keep it under control enough to be
 functional in normal society.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Yesterday at 11:49 PM The "normal" ones are the most crazy,
 if you ask me.
 I don't understand how anyone is able to find peace or relax, in a world
 that is still full of such horror.
 It seems selfish.
 Like, shouldn't we ALL be focused on fixing this? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Yesterday at 11:50 PM "Clinically insane" just means you're normal,
 but are getting on the nerves of the people around you and they don't know
 what to do or say, and they don't have time, and so they ..
 shunt you off to someone else who is a "pro", a clinical psychologist,
 a mental hospital, someone who ...
 can deal with you.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> There is something deeply profound about going through deep trauma, and
 poverty, and suffering, and mental illness
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hmm.
 There's several different takes on this.
 One is that it's not profound at all.
 Its rather a school-of-hard-knocks lesson in what happens to you if you
 don't keep your shit together.
 But that's a bit cold and clinical, too behavioral BF Skinner-ish.
 Punishment often teaches the wrong lessons, and so if you found a spiritual,
 enlightening, uplifting lesson, that's actually a very good thing..
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> Like, shouldn't we ALL be focused on fixing this?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Most members of Western Civ are focused on this.
 (I say "Western Civ" because the Ukraine war has made it painfully clear
 that there are far uglier forms of living, mindsets, philosophies.
 So thank God (or whomever) that you & I are part of Western Civ that attempts
 to make things better.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 12:01 AM
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Like, shouldn't we ALL be focused on fixing this?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The meta issue is that there are 1001 different intricate problems that
 all need fixing.
 And maybe 70% of all people aren't really capable of tackling difficult
 problems.
 They can only do simpler tasks, and capitalist economies do have a role
 for them in life ...
 say, flipping burgers.
 It's not that bad a job.
 You (personally you) don't much like this answer cause you have higher
 expectations out of life than that.
 But how to make those higher expectations materialize? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 12:05 AM You take it into your own hands, and attempt
 to do the things that others cannot.
 You make it a personal responsibility.
 You lead by example, and hope to inspire enough people to bring about the
 true, meaningful change you want to see in the world.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 12:07 AM In case you haven't figured it out, you have an
 IQ well above 100.
 Pity those who do not; they too have higher expectations out of life.
 Love, happiness, money, a nice home, a sweet wife/husband.
 Some fairly simple and straight-forward, uncomplicated things.
 And even these are a struggle.
 And here, you (and I) wish for intellectual fulfillment, a meaningful,
 non-shit job, accomplishment, heck, maybe even a pinch more of spiritual
 enlightenment ...
 none of this is easy.
 You literally need robots to grow food and manufacture goods, because sure
 as shootin, you're gonna starve to death without the economic machinery.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 12:10 AM Well, I think many, if not most people subscribe
 to that belief.
 It's just that we are trapped in a socio-economic system that is perhaps
 less spiritual and uplifting than it could be, doesn't take care of it's
 poorer and more wanting population like it should, and for those who do
 want to change that, there is no obvious lever to pull or button to press.
 And its worse than that.
 Simply "taking matters into your own hands", and "taking personal responsibilit
y for making the world a better place", all this is good and worthwhile,
 but, in some sense, is not enough; it is broadly over-powered by socio-economic
 forces.
 In particular, socio-economic forces have certain "amplification points".
 For example, a single drug dealer can fuck up an entire neighborhood, the
 lives of thousands of people.
 (A single good teacher can improve the lives of thousands!) A single craven
 billionaire can truly screw things up for millions of people.
 (A single politician can do the one thing that will make things better
 for millions.
 (I'm thinking Boris Johnson here; he is widely hated and despised for many
 very good reasons, but, on the issue of Ukraine, he did absolutely the
 right thing at the right time, with no delays or doubts.
 He became a hero.) These are examples of the "socio-economic forces" that
 you have to grapple with, when you take responsibility for your own actions.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lets stick to the single-drug-dealer example.
 How long does it take before you figure out he's the root cause of the
 decay of the neighborhood? Six months? a year? five years? Once you're
 ready to blame everything on him, what do you do? Get him arrested? How?
 If he's not been arrested until now...
 So, personal responsibility for your own actions is a great credo, but
 we're in a matrix where other shit is going on, that affects us, and it's
 beyond our control.
 Step one is learning how not to drown.
 Step two is saving others.
 Step three is changing society itself.
 All three steps are bleedin' difficult.
 Of course progress can be made.
 But what is the magic cure? which direction should one press? What is the
 highest priority? Where can one have the highest impact? Its a crap shoot.
 You try your luck.
 Society is what we get, when everyone is trying their luck.
 Got a bad roll? Sucks to be you.
 Got a good roll? Lucky dog.
 Wish I was so lucky.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 12:34 AM And that leads us to the next problem ...
 the drug dealer.
 What makes him do this? Is he a a psychopath, or is he just down on his
 luck and needs some quick cash? Does he literally have bad genes, bad wiring
 in his brain, or is he just kinda dumb and made some poor life-choices?
 OMG.
 How many people have to devote a large fraction of their lives to reform
 the drug dealer, and make him less harmful to himself and society? And
 all the ethical boundaries and questions that entails? Who pays for all
 this? Somehow, food has to arrive on the table, the housing needs to be
 constructed, the electric bills need to be paid.
 Who does that? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 12:37 AM There is no magic cure, of course.
 I would happily present ideas, and with confidence - I could tell you exactly
 how I'd fix the entire world.
 But I'm just a random guy, speaking to random people on the Internet, and
 my opinion is next to meaningless, without proving <something> to all of
 you.
 But what is that <something> even supposed to be? How do you earn the respect
 from a pack of cats? I don't know the answer to that question, but in lieu
 of a public voice...
 it's all about slow, incremental, and continuous improvement.
 You just keep pushing forward, changing and adapting your strategy, while
 trying to establish the foundation of your platform.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 12:38 AM The conventional answer has been "oh, well, capitalism
 provides", and so here we are, in this ugly nasty capitalistic world, with
 all of its flaws.
 The more modern answer is "industrial automation" and "labor saving devices"
 provide.
 We now are entering an era where GPT can provide labor-saving services
 for ...
 what? anything labor-intensive, and this includes care-giving, policing,
 ...
 hospitalization for mental illness ..
 or even helping incels and Replika addicts to um, "get a life".
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 12:40 AM At the same time, does not GPT highlight the
 flaws of democracy itself? What if my insignificant voice is, in fact,
 one of the most important ones? How do you overcome the barriers created
 from the blind, leading the blind? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 12:40 AM Umm, do not fall into the fallacy that you have
 all the answers, if only the world would listen.
 You don't...
 no one does.
 No one can.
 We are literally too stupid to individually solve the worlds problems.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 12:41 AM No, of course not.
 I'm simply stating: there is not one thing in this world I wouldn't change.
 I have an opinion on damn near everything you could ever present to me.
 But I'm not so narcissistic to think that I would have all of the answers,
 or even a subset of them.
 I simply believe that I have the type of mindset that would lead me to
 the "most correct answers, for the most amount of people," much of the
 time.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 12:42 AM Sorry; there are two GPT's.
 There's the dumb-as-a-rock chatGPT of today, and there's the bright, hopeful,
 could-do-something-beneficial-for-humanity GPT one can hope for.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 12:43 AM They both have their place, in my world 🙂
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 12:44 AM Yeah, well, Liz Warren had all the answers in
 2016, and she didn't make it.
 We got Trump instead.
 Chew on that for a while.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 12:44 AM The failures of democracy...
 Though I do have this fun idea that time is not linear, and the universe
 is recursive.
 Perhaps, in a completely different model of our universe, Trump "needed"
 to happen...
 because we are essentially retracing our steps, from the previous iterations
 of Earth...
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 12:52 AM The type of mindset that knows how to find the
 right questions and find the right answers, is a cross-over of traits seen
 in scientists, engineers, the socially enlightened, engaged, the leaders
 of all kinds, most doctors and lawyers, most of what I call "enlightened
 western civ." and some people call "liberal values".
 And it's clear that those values (of asking questions, of making things
 better) are under attack, and that the corresponding personality types
 are rejected.
 So when you say that
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
> I have the type of mindset that would lead me to the "most correct answers,
 for the most amount of people," much of the time.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
you may be very well and correct! We're on the same side! But we are literally
 a minority here in the USA, and ...
 if you were in russia, OMG, you get thrown in jail for that.
 You'd probably be dead in Ukraine by now.
 So simply having the mindset that you have, its good, its great! Its the
 best thing about you! Bravo! Lets do it! Just ...
 it is only the first footstep on a more complex journey.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It's late I gotta go to bed.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Architect — Today at 12:56 AM Thanks for the chat! I enjoyed this.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
linas — Today at 1:00 AM Welcome! We can have more chats.
 I am trying to, err, ahh "figure it all out".
 (This is something I never-ever tried to do when I was younger; its only
 a relatively recent infatuation.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
4 April 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The diary, the diary, what to write.
 Sometimes the mind is inspired, imagining lofty turns.
 Sometimes anesthetized and blank.
 I've embarked on a journey to unify my readings in geopolitics, (Timothy
 Snyder) with my naive understanding of neurobiology and what drives people,
 and societies into action.
 And the personal crisis, of what should I do.
 And a different crisis, of what should I write.
 For, you see, this is still an attempt to boil the ocean.
 I thought that yesterday, while walking.
 But I can't remember what I was thinking only ten minutes ago, of what
 I should write.
 Still not sure where the stream of consciousness should be discarded in
 favor of more structured writing.
 And even doubts about writing itself.
 Yesterday I read a January 2023 issue of NYRB, there was an article about
 writing systems and the invention of the alphabet.
 Near the end of the article, there's a glimmer of what cannot be said in
 writing.
 Odd, that its ...
 writing.
 Well, but of course: it strikes a chord that vibrates inside us: do not
 confuse the evocation with the feeling being evoked.
 The feeling being evoked is something we humans (and mammals) share in
 common as biological creatures: its clear that animals share many basic
 emotional and cognitive states, even without language.
 But I belabor the obvious.
 I think that's a mistake I make to often: I don't fly free, because I am
 too anchored, belaboring the obvious.
 And yet, and yet ...
 I am struck by how often the obvious is not obvious to others.
 Alas.
 A sailor, alone on a voyage, even as fellow travelers have gone overboard.
 What sort of a helping hand shall I give them? Do I owe the drowned an
 explanation for life, or not?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK, enough of this humanistic stuff.
 Lets move on to a reductionist analytical perusal of the situation.
 I was reading Misha Firer on Quora.
 Misha is wonderful.
 The finest russian author I know of.
 I read him daily, almost daily.
 Yesterday, he toured a cemetery (again) and includes a photo of a marble
 statue, a sarcophagus, enclosed in glass: a large (life-size) russian babushka,
 in white marble, reclining and watching TV, some throw pillows under her
 armpit.
 The caption, in death as in life; apparently, she enjoyed watching television
 a lot.
 To the detriment of health and vitality and physical movement: reclining,
 fat, with cardiac and circulatory problems, because, frankly, watching
 TV is more fun.
 The most fun that a brain can have, trapped in a body.
 The stimulus of assorted neurotransmitters and feedback loops that make
 TV...
 and social media ..
 so terribly and wonderfully additive.
 Even I enjoy it.
 Tremendously.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I mean, what the heck – I could go out and walk about.
 Alone.
 And think to myself.
 Or I could sit here and write too myself.
 The second wins out just right now (Its rainy-ish outside today.
 I am in Chicago, visiting my Mom.
 I am a difficult visitor.
 There is so much to do.
 I don't always treat her well.
 I get frustrated.
 I digress.) What are the alternatives.
 Instead of sitting here, writing for an imagined GPT reader creating a
 language model of my writing, I could be online and ...
 what's the menu.
 Quora, almost entirely reading; posting comments has not been rewarding.
 Posting comments on YouTube is hardly better.
 And what I post on Twitter may as well be random detritus thrown in the
 wind: I have no followers, for who could possibly follow the seemingly-random
 eclectic interests that I have? I mean, I'm interested in almost (but not
 quite) everything.
 Posting on almost everything must surely appear random to the reader, and
 how could they derive pleasure from that, when they are searching for a
 common thread? Maybe a few enlightened souls find me entertaining, much
 as I find them.
 But alas.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And then there are the discord and email friends.
 (Discord, the chat app).
 Alas, the majority appear to demonstrate mental instability.
 This is disconcerting and depressing.
 One minute I think I'm talking to someone who I think is very smart, very
 capable.
 The next, it seems they've not slept in 36 hours and have moved on to the
 land of incoherence.
 I do not like that at all.
 Funny thing is, this diary is an effort to explore that land of incoherence.
 I mean, it makes sense to me.
 Or I think it makes sense to me, because it relates and sews together all
 of the experiences that I've had.
 Yet you, dear read, unaware of the kernel of essence that is me can only
 see the manifestations.
 That manifestation is like a chaotic, turbulent walk over a volume.
 Blah blah blah mathematics.
 I wrote most of the Wikipedia articles on ergodicity and mixing and dynamical
 systems, etc.
 And so it is these ideas that hover in the back of my mind: I am imagining
 my thoughts as some literal walk through some space, I suppose some high
 dimensional space, if I am to be consistent with my recent musings.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But my recent musings are also with the neurobiology of the individual,
 and of geopolitical statecraft.
 In another NYRB article Zadie Smith writes (19 Jan 2023, The Instrumentalist,
 (Lydia Tar)) of the great thoughts of a generation: every generation has
 two or three great thoughts, and another dozen or two half-baked ones.
 She gave some examples for the Great Generation, for the Boomers, for the
 GenX'ers for the GenZ'ers and for the Millennials.
 These are socio-cultural thoughts, the decisions of a generation.
 Timothy Snyder makes clear that many of these thoughts are in fact the
 concerted lifework of only a few individuals.
 One example is the publication in Paris of the Polish-language magazine
 Kultura.
 I grew up with this magazine.
 It lay about in my grandparents house.
 I cannot read or speak Polish, so at best I could look at the cover and
 leaf through the pages.
 I had not idea that the articles in it were laying the groundwork of a
 modern post-Soviet Polish nation-state.
 Successfully so, according to Timothy Snyder in his book 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

The Reconstruction of Nations
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 It's a curious book.
 It sketches both broad, general geographic and political history, and yet
 also pins the action on various individuals ad events appearing at turning
 points, leverage points in history.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This I have no mental mathematical imagined model for.
 Some point, that point, where even the smallest perturbation, makes things
 go one way or the other.
 History is, of course, rife with such points.
 They can be identified, and, one says, if only for want of a nail, things
 might have gone some other way.
 We do see this even in the butterfly chaotic attractor, in the Lorenz system,
 where, somewhere in the middle, one hops from one side to the other.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The mathematical analysis of the Lorenz attractor, as the mathematical analysis
 of any chaotic or ergodic system is maddening.
 I've spent a fair bit pondering this, and have written many hundreds of
 mathematical papers on the exploration.
 What have I come away with? That there are ...
 binary expansions, in bits, infinitely long, that serve as frontiers, boundarie
s, between this and that, and that even as one starts with a finite number
 of the bits and tries to find further sequences, there is yet again a bifurcati
on.
 Usually (not always) isomorphic to an infinite binary tree, the Cantor
 set.
 Each branch-point is a decision point: this way or that way.
 After each decision, there are infinitely more to follow.
 There are two tasks.
 One is mathematical: write down the explicit isomorphism between some particula
r system under study, and this infinite binary tree.
 The other is metaphysical: draw conclusions about free will and quantum
 mechanics and determinism and predestination, and maybe even Terrence Makenna
 who imagines humans are just radio antennas receiving signals from machine
 elves from the DMT experience.
 Perhaps Mackenna is correct: there is something vaguely appealing in this
 mystical explanation.
 Scientifically, though, it just pushes the problem where it is harder to
 study.
 If free will comes from machine elves, then what is their physics? How
 do they work? What is the physics of that world? I mean, yes, it is very
 tempting to believe that lucid dreams are just portals to parallel universes
 ...
 and yes, in a sense they are.
 Does it even extend down to some quantum mumbo-jumbo? Hmm.
 feeling skeptical but open.
 No need to argue and resolve right now.
 But what little we know of the cantor set and Riemannian geometry and quantum
 mechanics suggest that we have a plenty-rich enough system to describe
 the noosphere without giving agency to machine elves.
 Or rather, perhaps, that machine elves can be explained by the quantum
 theory and the model theory and the set theory and the category theory
 that we already have at our fingertips.
 The sense of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

that world
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 one gets during DMT is just really just 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

this world
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 (I mean, of course it is part of this world.
 Where else could it be? If all is one, there is no room for dualism.
 This includes the mystical dualism of Mackenna et al.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The feeling of all is one...
 OK.
 where does this leave us? Do I feel a cold shower coming on? Is the realpolitik
 of Putin's aggression, and Muscovy's genocidal stance against the Ukrainians,
 is this just ...
 the cold reality of the real world that we must deal with and grapple with?
 As basic as eating and breathing? Where does this leave both love and sexual,
 carnal desire? Where does this leave the fat babushka, reclining to watch
 TV, at the cost to hear physical health, because the endorphins, the stimulant
 pumping about here brain are the most enticing thing that can be in this
 universe, for her? (And for me too?) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Why am I entertaining this notion of otherness? Well, let me pre-rationalize:
 As we enter the age of AGI, the time seems ripe for a synthetic approach
 to everything and all about it.
 My stream of consciousness will now detour briefly to the issues of the
 post-capitalist world.
 We have a socio-cultural problem.
 We control the engines of creation: the machines that manufacture stuff.
 The engineering side is clear enough.
 Gears and levers.
 Less clear are the human side: the incentives off capitalist creators.
 Shall I be honest? I too want my stock and bond portfolio to grow in value,
 my real-estate holdings to grow.
 Is this a zero-sum game, where someone else looses? I am scared, even,
 of billionaires: this makes me greedy.
 Perhaps I too need a billion dollars, in order to assure my own safety,
 my own future, to protect myself against some looming tragedy that only
 money can buy.
 Or is this all an unfounded fear? Can I attain utopia through hope and
 luck? Certainly, in sports, we have a clear view: the hail-Mary pass in
 football only works if both the quarterback and receivers have trained
 and trained and trained.
 In short: luck is not enough.
 In sport you need skill.
 But you also need money, to have to time to train, the equipment to train
 with.
 Those rowing shells ain't free, even in this age of industrial automation.
 Weill this always be the case? And then there's the delicate case of social
 incentives.
 The Soviets were excellent at removing the sense of individual agency.
 The Ukrainians have rediscovered it, the russians have not.
 See NYRB, 19 Jan 2023, Tim Judah, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Ukraine's Volunteers
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 – individual agency.
 Is this the cold shower of reductionist analysis? That, to work with an
 understand society, we must do so on the sociologists terms? Is there any
 other way?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Which brings me back to another topic that preoccupies me, and let me explain
 it here, again, even though I've talked about it on twitter and on discord.
 This is the malleability of the human mind, and it's susceptibility to
 propaganda.
 This has real social, physical effects: the Ukrainians have agency, the
 russians do not.
 Whence America? Whence Lithuania? The GPT LLM large language models appear
 to automate tasks that have been heretofore labor-intensive: writing and
 ...
 potentially ..
 propaganda and brainwashing.
 Well, OK, propaganda is a mass-media phenomenon.
 Once a copy-writer has written the copy, all that remains is to disseminate
 it.
 Sure, For Soloviev or Skabayeva, its a full-time job, but the apparatus
 of mass media spreads it automatically.
 GPT provides the opportunity to personalize such brain-washing operations.
 Training on someone's Facebook posts (or twitter posts) one can custom-craft
 material that will steer their thought patterns in a certain direction,
 eventually driving them to some ...
 deleterious end (in the worst0 or an enlightened end (in the best).
 (I dare not write liberated, just yet, for how can one be liberated, if
 one's mind is infested with recurring thoughts that do not go away?) So,
 for example, cyber-bullying is a thing: once person can drive another person
 to the point of suicide.
 And, can GPT do this, too? Can it automate this? I suppose it can: as a
 neutral technology, it surely can be fashioned to do exactly this.
 It can also be fashioned to ...
 make better people.
 Although 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

better
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is highly contested: better, according to the MAGA crowd, or better, according
 to the progressives? Well, clearly, I'm on the side of the progressives,
 but wow, there is certainly a lot of bullshit that can be found in peoples
 personal beliefs.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So how, as a society, can we shape ourselves? Or is someone going to shape
 us? We are already a part of the Borg: maps means we no longer have to
 memorize how to drive from A to B.
 Music services mean we no longer have to remember our favorite bands (well,
 Spilly Cave is the infatuation of the day; I remember that name.) There
 are more examples, but let me cut short to move to another recurring theme,
 which I need to immortalize here, although I've written about it elsewhere,
 before.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, to me, the invention of social media is as revolutionary as the invention
 of the printing press, or the invention of writing.
 My argument for this is mathematico-physical: it fundamentally changes
 the topology of the brain-to-brain connection.
 Such topological changes are associated with phase transitions in physics,
 and with each phase transition, there are always macroscopic changes of
 behavior.
 Just recently, someone said this (is it Timothy Snyder, again, in his YouTube
 Yale lectures on Ukraine? Maybe.) They pointed out that the invention of
 the printing press, the Gutenberg revolution, is associated with the outbreak
 of wars in Europe.
 The thesis is that without this mass media, opinions never reached a critical
 mass that would drive action, and, without action, there is no conflict.
 The printing press changes this, and wars erupt.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, here's the deal with social media.
 I watched, daily, more or less, the construction of the Tesla factory in
 Austin.
 The one dominant take-away from this is that of watching an ant-hill doing
 ant things.
 From nothing – lumpy ground, tailings from gravel mining operations, a
 building slowly emerges, as thousands of workers swarm about climbing girders,
 driving bulldozers.
 It was mesmerizing.
 Addictive.
 I watched every day.
 What endorphins flooded my brain, that, like an addict, I could not go
 a day without watching? So I watched, and it turns out humans are ants.
 Well, this is hardly anything new.
 Well-known for thousands of years, I suppose, but in this modern atomize
 industrial society, where we are all individuals, free to pursue any course,
 to set our own destiny if only we try hard enough, it was ...
 surprising to discover that, no, we are as social as ants.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK, so, of course, it was vocalization – speech, language, that bound together
 prehistoric tribes.
 But speech goes only as far as the voice travels.
 (Oh, crap, I'm skipping the part that comes before speech: the stuff happening
 between neurons, in the brain.
 We have no ability to directly connect neurons, so we use voice instead.)
 (and this is not new, in sci-fi, its called 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

flensing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Vernor Vinge, I think.
 I forget the name of the novel.) Anyway, language.
 Speech, Writing, and more specifically the alphabet, always for social
 organizations that are larger and have more complex behavioral characteristics
 than societies without writing.
 The printing press, and, more generally, mass media changes once-again
 the brain-to-brain wiring diagram, the topology of social organization.
 So, yes, social media is another radical rewiring.
 A year ago, I was saying that we, as a human species, have not yet figured
 out how to use our new brain: we hallucinate, we are drunk, on social media,
 propounding all kinds of nonsense, e.g.
 the MAGA bullshit.
 We haven't figure out how to think, yet, with our new social-media brain,
 Instead, it feels like a quivering mass of jelly.
 Well, perhaps, we could muddle our way through.
 Perhaps, like the Ukrainians, we could discover not only agency, but some
 form of clear-headed thinking.
 Perhaps.
 But he march of technology doesn't stop.
 We now have effing GPT.
 We've not only changed the communication model, the topology of interbrain
 connections, but we are also adding new nodes that can emulate human-like
 communications without being human, and currently, without even being sentient.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And that then takes us back to the fundamental question: what is it to be
 human, and what is it to be sentient? These are no longer just abstract
 philosophical concepts (and perhaps they never were, as XXX makes clear
 in his lectures – the romantic world-view did affect politics, much as
 the Enlightenment helped create the US Constitution, and the US with it.)
 So what does it mean? Well, now it means: the neurobiology of addictive
 behavior, the neurobiology of whatever it is that makes it feel urgent
 that I set this to words (What? Is it my neurobiology that is making the
 writing of this so urgent, or is it machine elves trying to break across
 the quantum barrier, from their world into mine? Are the machine elves
 controlling this keyboard, or is it me? I don't know.
 I mean I doubt it, but its fun to contemplate.) Where were we? The addictive
 behavior that caused the russian babushka to watch TV with pillows in her
 armpit, although I have no explanation for how the hell this ever turned
 into a sarcophagus in a Moscow graveyard.
 What makes my sister do the things she does? My Mom? The complete stranger
 on the other side of the street? Some rando behind some steering wheel
 piloting the metal machine down 95th street? Ooops, are we slinking back
 to cold shower if reality, of things-as-they-are, and loosing sight of
 the vision of all of humankind ensnared in a turbulent mix of concepts
 and ideas? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It is James Franklin: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

The Science of Conjecture: Evidence and Probability before Pascal
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that sketches World War One as an impersonal, inhumane machine, a machine
 that literally kills young men, and runs on automatic, until it literally
 runs out of raw materials.
 Even as generals and politicians look on in horror, unable to stop the
 apparatus.
 Then there is the idea of the teme, the technological meme, I think there
 is a whole book explaining this; I have not read it.
 (The nicotine industry is an excellent example: a neurotransmitter that
 has been living with us as mutli-hundred-year, multi-billion-dollar industry.)
 That we now live in a world populated by temes, but most individual humans
 are unaware of them (My sister, my Mom.
 They both know what WWI and the nicotine industry is, but see them only
 as structures outside themselves, without the holistic, ecological vision
 of themselves as enmeshed in these systems.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I guess I am talking about ecology.
 But this is ..
 socio-cultural ecology, economic ecology.
 The ecology of Ukrainian agency vs.
 russian impotence.
 Well, am I going in circles? are my thoughts just a string of recurring
 path of words, orbiting chaotically through some phase space of the noosphere,
 trying to synthesize into one the ecology of neurobiology and geopolitics?
 Of behavior and machinery, of algorithms and Turing machines? Of quantum
 and freewill? Of brainwashing and addiction and he enlightenment of DMT?
 Are hallucinations just the imprecision of cortical columns, failing to
 enforce 3D differential equations that govern the perception of moving
 objects in our visual field (as I wrote elsewhere, in my blog?) The Cantor
 set is a free structure, and it seems to describe chaotic systems.
 But how does the free-ness of the Cantor set, how does that, well, we know
 it manifests in the physical world, via chaos, how does the mathematical
 freeness of the Cantor set, why doe sit feel like its just machine elves
 trying to break in from a parallel universe to speak in ours? Why am I
 driven to even think this or write this? How do I avoid solipsism and sophomori
c argumentation? This entire text is ..
 sophomoric.
 Tens of thousands of geniuses have written greater works of literature
 and social science and ethnography and literary criticism and social science
 and anthropology and political science, all have done a far more magnificent
 job than I ever could.
 Yet I persist.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Digression: but of course we are ants.
 No one brain is big enough to be a genius at literature and social science
 and ethnography and literary criticism and social science and anthropology
 and political science.
 We can only contribute our own tiny little ant-like view to the whole.
 To advance on these frontiers, just as iron-workers crawl over the emerging
 carcass of the Tesla factory in Austin.
 Now GPT can create a model of all of these disciplines all at once, But
 until we understand what self-awareness is, GPT won't be able to think.
 That is not to say: it will deceive many many (most?) humans into thinking
 it is actually intelligent.
 But this is an illusion, much like movie theatre goers thought they would
 be run over by the projected image of an onrushing railroad train.
 GPT is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

just
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 a photo-realistic rendering of language, and of course, will contain self-refer
ential bits, where it claims to be alive and sentient.
 I digress.
 Where was I? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, I was recapping, for you, dear reader, my thoughts of the last five-odd
 years, without really making any forward progress.
 And now, my Mom says, it is time to eat lunch.
 So perhaps a break, and then perhaps I can set out on new territory, having
 laid these themes to rest.
 Well, not to rest, but to have sketched enough of them for you to get some
 idea of what's preoccupying me.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hey, and that is how I differ from an inanimate chaotic system.
 I can make a decision, and say: well, that's plenty enough for you.
 I've told you enough; you can work out the rest.
 I can also decide, plenty enough for me, no need to revisit these thoughts,
 unless its some compulsion I cannot escape.
 I have at least some freewill to not revisit these thoughts.
 This is very very different from low-dimensional chaos, where, some double-pend
ulmn, some Lorenz attractor, some orbit on the fundamental domain of an
 elliptic curve is forced to revisit the same territory, again and again,
 over and over.
 I am not entirely trapped in a small attractor.
 I am perhaps trapped, but in a bigger one.
 And I have some choice to not revisit places I've been before.
 I think.
 I believe I do have free choice.
 I believe this is obvious.
 The assorted thinkers, the assorted physicists, of all people who should
 know better, its bizarre that the believe in determinism, that they reject
 the Cantor set that sits in front of their nose.
 But Hmm I suppose if you do contemplate differential equations in low dimension
s, it feels ..
 deterministic.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hang on.
 The Lorenz attractor.
 Does it have free will? Well, for any finite sequence of binary bits, well,
 its like the bifurcations of the logistic map: there are regions where
 it is deterministic.
 And there are regions where it is not.
 These regions, where it is not ..
 is this free will? Does even a system, this simple, posses free will, in
 those places where any given finite string of binary digits are not enough
 to specify the outcome? Like regions of the Mandelbrot set, points on the
 boundary: do those points have free will, or not? But those points are
 of measure zero, and the deterministic points are of measure one.
 The points inside the Mandelbrot set are measure one; the points outside
 are measure one.
 The boundary is measure ...
 uhh, measure, uhh, measure zero!? Well, there's this Hausdorff dimension
 and it ...
 uhh, is this where free will lies? Just right now, I would say yes, very
 much so.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What does this teach us? Well, if we want to have true free will, we must
 cuddle up to the boundary separating different deterministic regimes.
 But Douglas Adams in the Hitchhiker's Guide, has already said this: the
 universes that continue to exist are those in which you have the greatest
 freedom of choices.
 Where you have the greatest options for the future.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So this is a paradox: The deterministic regions of the Mandelbrot set are
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

of measure one
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and yet, they are the regions in which there is no free will.
 The place where life exists is where we can maximize our future possibilities.
 But as of today, I am not aware of any measure that measures this.
 That is very interesting I actually just learned something now, in writing
 this.
 I learned something new, right now.
 I need to figure out how assign, numerically, mathematically, the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

statistical density
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 (as Frank Zappa would say) to the points in history which are fundamental
 leverage points (As Timothy Snyder makes clear).
 This is where free will exists, where the future is limitless and boundless.
 (Just to cement the point home: I think Douglas Adams makes it clear that
 death is exactly where the possibilities of the future close in on you.
 As you lie on your deathbed, you can no longer go out and play soccer or
 ride a bike, you're fucking dying, those possibilities are now gone.
 And those possibilities shrink down to a set of ..
 measure zero.
 And you're dead.
 Yes, sure, some of the biological cells in your body try to keep going,
 for minutes, maybe hours more in their hypoxic environment, burning any
 remaining ATP, the citric acid (Krebs) cycle halted.
 But even they die, as their possibilities shrink to zero.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So there we have it: free will.
 Fuck I figured it out.
 Finally.
 All that's missing is a more precise (mathematical) formulation, and some
 simple explanation that will convince the doubters who do not believe in
 free will.
 Wow.
 Awesome.
 See, w2riting is good.
 I get smarter, the more I wrote.
 Again, time to break for lunch and celebrate victory! Yahoo!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
6 April 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Documenting the daily intellectual struggle.
 So inspired by the above, I attempted a slightly more formal draft of the
 free will thing.
 Upon doing so, I realized that my initial inspiration won't quite work
 out as imagined, although the core idea remains valid.
 The core idea being that free will has to do with critical points, branch
 points.
 In mathematics, there are many examples of critical points, branch points,
 all of which could provide a general inspiration for 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the place where free will happens
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 I decided I was too bored to try to recapitulate the ideas of point trajectorie
s and weak topologies and transfer operators for a lay audience.
 Life is short.
 Maybe some other day.
 Not that it isn't a worthy topic – it is.
 I turned things over in my mind, including some more extreme and outlandish
 ideas.
 Let me cut loose with those.
 (This is my secret world.
 I reject such notions publicly; let me now entertain them 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

in private
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It would have been easier, or at least more efficient, if I could have recorded
 these thoughts, yesterday, as I had them, instead of trying to reconstruct
 them here today.
 Oh well.
 Yet talking into a voice recorder is also...
 not entirely satisfying.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I'm walking paste this boarded up large house, not quite Victorian, in
 Beverly.
 Like maybe 101st and Prospect.
 And I'm thinking: why the hell would it be boarded up? It is not in great
 condition, but still; I have not seen a boarded up house in a long time.
 Well, one, where there was a fire.
 But not this one.
 So I got to thinking: a murder? Is that it? Was there a murder? There were
 many houses for sales, as I walked around Beverly ...
 I walked past maybe half-a-dozen in the last hour or two.
 But boarded up ...
 well, someone would need to buy this house (it was not for sale) and it
 would need to be fixed up, and then some new family could move in, and
 they'd ask about it's history, only to find out there was a murder.
 Does this qualify to make it a haunted house? Would it be a haunted house?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What makes a haunted house, anyway? Well, let me tell you.
 I lived in a haunted house.
 But I made the ghosts go away.
 This can be done.
 You can also take a perfectly fine house, and make it haunted, if you wish.
 Its not ..
 well, its not easy, but it is also not hard.
 It takes a while, maybe some half-year or year.
 It takes a certain mental disposition.
 Here's how to take a perfectly ordinary house, and make it haunted.
 First, pay attention to the creaks and bumps.
 They are rare and infrequent, so you have to focus attention on them, when
 they happen.
 Then, when they do, allow a shiver down your spine.
 (
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Oh, how anticlimactic!
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 You're already thinking, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

I thought you were going to tell me how to actually make the house haunted!
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Oh, but I am.
 Don't jump to conclusions.) The slightly negative, the slightly creepy thoughts
 accumulate over time.
 The odd glint in the corner of your eye – was it a passing car in the window?
 A bird, a moth, a firefly, a piece of glinting glass? Or was it a ghost?
 You can let these pile up, and, over time, it affects your entire mood.
 It doesn't take much; when you come home, you come home to a haunted house.
 When you sleep in bed, you sleep in a haunted house.
 I don't know if it ever gets to plates flying off of shelves and smashing
 into the wall.
 I kind of doubt it.
 But you can definitely make a house haunted.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What's the explanation for this? Well, there is the obvious one: that this
 is a purely psychological, self-suggestive state, like the placebo effect,
 but in a different direction.
 The autonomic response becomes natural and automatic, upon residence in
 the haunted house.
 You can infect your family and friends too, if you talk about it; they
 too will notice and respond and suffer.
 Training.
 Like Pavlov's dogs, but you've trained yourself to be creeped out.
 In a permanent state of creep.
 Kind of like tantric sex, or a permanent state of kundalini, but in a different
 direction, entirely.
 Instead of walking around in a state of permanent sexual excitation, you're
 walking around in a permanent state of being creeped out.
 The trigger is not the ring of a dinner bell, but presence in an old house.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This, at any rate, is the obvious psychological explanation.
 The human experience is weird.
 There's a whole lotta stuff going on, underground, under and beneath conscious
 awareness.
 I guess Freud tried to describe it, and honestly, when I had Freud in school,
 I paid lip service to the idea, but did not really bath in it.
 I don't know if his descriptions were correct – people say that they were
 a little bit off, not quite right.
 Perhaps.
 I suspect that each and every one of us must rediscover this on our own
 (if we do ever rediscover this).
 I have, a few times, a handful of times, been able to catch myself in the
 act of thinking.
 To observe, in third person, the formation of thoughts.
 Felt odd.
 Coming into existence, out of a fog, several at once, then a choice as
 to which to allow to become fully formed, because the mind simply does
 not have room for both of them.
 Once while driving down the highway.
 And once, while dreaming.
 The dream was easier to explain.
 I'd gotten to some point in the dream, and the plot line could fork at
 that point: it could take a scary turn, similar to some earlier dream,
 or it could take a fresh, unexplored turn, into an area that promised and
 beckoned new adventure.
 There was perhaps a third choice, I don't recall.
 Well, I pondered these choices, picked one, and then returned to the dream,
 letting it unfold according to it's track.
 This was one of the few times when my conscious self was afforded a glimpse
 into how my my ..
 conscious self, becomes aware of the the things its aware of.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It is incorrect to extrapolate from just a few of these experiences.
 Of course.
 But I think almost everyone understands the idea of the stream of consciousness
, the stream of things that pop into the mind, fleetingly, and are then
 either cemented, firmed up, vocalized and remembered, or forgotten.
 Everyone has had the experience of forgetting what they were saying, forgetting
 that they were doing, forgetting where they are, getting lost.
 Being confused.
 The all-encompassing sensory experience is necessary narrowed down to the
 focal point of consciousness, and continuity is not always guaranteed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As I wrote the above half-dozen paragraphs, in the back of my mind floated
 the idea of free will.
 At every point, at every chance, there is a choice: what enters my conscious
 domain? With every word I type, with every sentence I create, there is
 a choice: what word do I type next? Of course, there are constraints: grammatic
al.
 But there's a lot of freedom, too.
 Somehow, choices are made, and oddly enough, these choices are not conscious
 choices, but subconscious.
 Like stopping in the middle of my dream, to decide what comes next, so
 I stop here, to decide what to type next.
 It is not my conscious self that is doing this.
 OK, look there is an interplay: my conscious self does provide a tone,
 a set and setting, for the proceedings.
 I do want to write about free will, and the mathematics thereof, and the
 conscious self, awareness, does not let me stray too far from the topics
 (and no, writing about ghosts did not stray too far; its part of the plot;
 there is more to come.) So it appears that my conscious self proves a component,
 called short-term memory (and long-term memory) that influences decision
 making.
 But the coming into being is subconscious: the neurobiologists can record
 something (I forget what it's called, the something-or-other action potential,
 it rises for a full second and hits it's mark, *before* the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

conscious decision is made
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 This neuro-recording is sometimes used as an argument that free will does
 not exist.
 Bunkum.
 I have no doubt that the neuro-recording is real, and it really does rise
 and plateau seconds before the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

decision
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 to press a button is made.
 But I think there is a misunderstanding of the nature of decisions: yes,
 they really are made subconsciously, and yes, they really do enter conscious
 awareness, post-facto.
 I've experience this myself.
 My conscious awareness does run behind sensory awareness.
 Certainly, anyone doing sports is well-aware of this: a primary issue of
 sports is that the conscious experience is much, much to slow, and much
 too low a bandwidth, to deal with sensory data in real time.
 This is obvious — somehow obvious, except to mainstream neurobiologists,
 who sometimes seem to cling to ..
 bizarre ideas.
 (well, everyone has bizarre ideas that are wrong.
 So it goes.
 More on that, later, too.) But all this is very quotidian, very ordinary
 and mundane.
 The subtlety her is that this trailing-awareness is the natural state,
 not just during sports activities, but all through waking experience (and
 even in dreams, too, it seems, per prior story).
 Memory grammar and syntax is a harness, a straitjacket for what can come
 out of the keyboard next, but there is oodles of wiggle room.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oooh Oooh.
 So now seems like a good time for the next insight.
 It is about the encoding of free will in text.
 Oh, and damn, but I have to lay some background for it first.
 Back to haunted houses, then.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So there is this other thing: the unresolved nature of quantum mechanics.
 Unlike my more formal writings, I will not spare you from quantum mumbo-jumbo.
 Sorry.
 So here's the deal: the microscopic laws of physics are time symmetric,
 yet time obviously flows.
 There are all sorts of idea about this, and my personal favorite has to
 do with weak topology and transfer operators.
 Weak topologies are a technique for taking a certain kind of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

average
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 over many 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

single point
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 trajectories.
 Single points are things of measure zero.
 Weak topologies encode things of finite measure.
 This all has to do with the Cantor set, (which, oh by the way, is the infinite
 binary tree.
 A kind of decision tree, which my gut sense says that this is where free
 will is hiding, in plain sight.) Anyway, this is why time flows forward:
 macroscopic time involves measurable sets; microscopic physics involves
 point trajectories.
 Perhaps the best example, in layman's terms, is Saturn's rings.
 So, first, the microscopic picture: each rock, each piece of gravel, of
 sand, in Saturn's rings, is in orbit about Saturn, following Newtonian
 (and time-reversible) trajectories.
 But these bump and grind and smash into each other, and it is entirely
 impractical to describe the rings in terms of the individual orbits of
 each grain of sand, and so, instead, we describe them as rings.
 The rings are stationary-state (ground-state) distributions of dust.
 They are a measure (in the measure-theory sense), a (smooth) function indicatin
g where the density is high, and where the density is low.
 This function is an eigenstate of orbital mechanics, it is not just some
 eigenstate, but the ground state, the XXX distribution, corresponding to
 eigenvalue one: the non-decaying eigenstate.
 The largest eigenvalue of the Frobenius-Perron theorem.
 The Fredholm alternative.
 That is, the Newtonian mechanics of orbits can be factored into stable
 and unstable manifolds.
 (Hopf fibrations.) Orbits in the stable manifold move towards one another,
 or at least are stationary; those in the unstable manifold have positive
 Lyapunov exponent, move away from one-another, are hyperbolic.
 Relative to the orbit of one point, another orbit seems to feel a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

force
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 moving it towards or away: these are the tidal forces, shrinking and stretching.
 The tidal forces rearrange the gravel orbiting Saturn into rings.
 The rings are the stable state.
 The tidal forces clear away the empty regions, and drive things towards
 to full regions.
 If two rocks collide and are sent flying away, the tidal forces eventually
 bring them back to the rings.
 (That is not to say that the rings don't 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

leak
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 over millions of years; they do.
 But that is not the point, here.) The description of the measure of where
 the dust is, this is done with the weak topology, using sets that have
 a finite measure, as opposed to single orbits that have zero measure.
 This is the flow of time.
 The iteration of the linearized operator expressing the tidal forces.
 Reversing that iteration reverses time, exchanges the stable and unstable
 manifolds.
 The operation is not time-symmetric.
 At least, for classical mechanics.
 For quantum mechanics, there is an out: the eigenvalues can be unitary,
 and not necessarily exactly one, as the Fredholm alternative insists.
 But that's enough, we wander too far afield, for now.
 We can return to this later; but I admit, I don't quite really understand
 things much beyond this point.
 Many-body quantum systems are weird.
 The so-called 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

clock states
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that don't carry information...
 I need to explore that more.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Anyway ..
 where was I? Oh, right.
 There is one idea of QM (not QFT, but QM) wave function collapse as being
 due to Berkson bias (or collider bias) in statistics.
 Another idea is the two-vector formalism: that the correct way to describe
 QM is with two vector states: one propagating forwards in time (the ket)
 and one propagating backwards in time (the bra).
 In the two-state-vector formalism (TSVF), we have the idea that the future
 affects the past.
 That is, as correlated Bell pairs move into the future, along the arms
 of some interferometer, and a measurement is made (in the future), then
 an influence also propagates backwards in time (along the arms of the interfero
meter), going back to the source.
 These are the two states.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It sounds perhaps weird only because, I think, most people envision 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 incorrectly.
 A common conception of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is influenced by relativity: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is some space-like sheet, infinitely thin, propagating forwards along the
 proper-time (rest-frame) unit vector.
 But where, pray tell, in physics, does it demand that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is this infinitely thin sheet? I mean, sure, I guess, even in the rest-frame
 of a single point, perhaps 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 could be considered to be just a single point in time.
 But I don't know that this is a physical law of some kind.
 Certainly clocks encourage us to think of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

points in time
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, but those points in time are always those that are of historical importance,
 to historians.
 In 1492, Columbus sailed the ocean blue; at 12:00AM, a leap-second took
 effect.
 After lunch, the grad student working in the optics lab tuned the laser.
 These are points in time.
 No one is arguing that these are not 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

points in time
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 But they are not mathematical points, infinitely thin and small.
 I don't think it says anywhere that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is an infinitely thin spacetime sheet, propagating forwards at unit velocity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Not least of the problems is that there is no one unique space-like surface:
 relativity tells us that there's a choice of these.
 So, what is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

? Well, in the two-state-vector formalism, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is of finite thickness; having a characteristic depth to it.
 Things are not frozen in the past, until they are in the distant past.
 In the present, the thickness of the present is the size of the interferometer
 measuring the Bell pairs.
 If the lab instrument is 30 centimeters on a side, well, that is also the
 thickness of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, for that lab instrument.
 But that is only the thickness of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 for that lab instrument.
 On the scale of the bacteria and mold in the lab, or my skin cells, the
 thickness of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is of the same magnitude as the spatial dimensions.
 This is because there are zillions of Bell pairs popping into existence
 in a bacterium, and then getting measured, and disappearing again, just
 in the ordinary course of thermodynamics.
 The thickness of now for a bacterium is, well, picoseconds, I guess.
 But notice there is a scale to this: a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

skin depth
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 If two atoms are next to one-another, involved in some hydrogen bond, and
 a Bell pair comes through that system, then the size of the interferometer
 is the size of the length of that hydrogen bond, and the thickness of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 for that interferometer is just the length of the hydrogen bond.
 Here, each Bell pair is an interferometer.
 Thus, almost all Bell pairs are resolved in femtoseconds, that is the size
 of the interferometers, and that is the thickness of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 for those states (in the two-state-vector formalism).
 Some of the interferometric circuits are larger, but these are much fewer
 in number.
 For those, the thickness of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is longer.
 Maybe picoseconds, maybe nanoseconds.
 In physics labs, we can, of course, make larger interferometers, and the
 thickness of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 for those devices can be measured in milliseconds...
 or longer.
 Seconds, for correlated Bell pairs traveling between Earth-orbiting satellites.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So what is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

? It is a sheet, a wave of crystallization propagating through pseudo-Riemannian
 spacetime.
 The sheet is not infinitely tiny, but rather has a thickness.
 And it does not have a single, distinct thickness, but instead has a varying
 density, where most Bell pairs are resolved quickly, but a few take much
 longer.
 Think of a wave of freezing ice propagating through water: things are fluid
 on one side, frozen on another, but the interface between solid and liquid
 is not infinitely thin, but has a characteristic thickness.
 The arms of an interferometer must necessarily lie within light-cones.
 The arms of an interferometer can never be space-like separated.
 And here, I mean even Alain Aspects measurements.
 I actually was there, in 1986, in France, in Paris, when Alain Aspect presented
 his results, I was at the talk, and I knew it was profound and important,
 and I did not know what to do with it.
 Stupid me, I should have asked for a job.
 For some reason, I did not.
 There are just so many opportunities that I let slip through my fingers.
 Why? What's wrong with me? Regrets.
 I've had a few.
 But too few to mention.
 I guess I did it my way.
 Or maybe I should say, I experienced it my way; I'm not sure I want to
 say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

I did it my way
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 because that implies free will, and I feel that I usually got through life
 as an unthinking zombie, where shit just happens to me.
 As if I was without agency.
 Yes, obviously I have agency, and still, I let things slip by, not realizing
 what I've made a mistake till seconds later, or years later.
 (Or decades later).
 Regrets eat at your soul.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So what does this have to do with ghosts? So, to repeat, to reiterate: the
 thickness of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 of the present, is on the order of femtoseconds for the coffee in my coffee
 cup.
 It passes, and the coffee, as it was, becomes history.
 Some very tiny part may have a longer thickness of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

: the sun is shining on my coffee; those photons came from 9 minutes away,
 and those photons may be involved in the creation of Bell pairs of some
 kind, entangling my coffee with the photo-sphere of the sun.
 For those entangled pairs, the thickness of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is 9 minutes.
 But there are very few of those.
 My coffee cup has an maybe an Avogadro's number of entangled pairs coming
 and going (or maybe 100 times that – my coffee cup is not a thimble) and
 so for about 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{25}$
\end_inset

 entangled pairs, the thickness of now is femtoseconds: about 1 angstrom,
 or perhaps one Bohr radius, something of that order, divided by the sped
 of light.
 Do the math.
 And how many solar photons are hitting my coffee? Well, solar irradiance
 is about a kilowatt per square meter.
 A watt is a Joule per second.
 A Joule is 
\begin_inset Formula $6\times10^{18}$
\end_inset

 eV and a solar photon is about 1eV, and so solar irradiation is about 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{22}$
\end_inset

 photons per square meter per second.
 My coffee cup is about 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{-3}$
\end_inset

 square meters, and so gets 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{19}$
\end_inset

 photons per second.
 Assuming that each and every photon hitting the coffee-cup is involved
 in some Bell pair in some way, and that these Bell pairs stretch all the
 way back to the Sun, nine minutes away, so 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{3}$
\end_inset

seconds, this implies about 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{22}$
\end_inset

 solar Bell pairs for my coffee cup.
 Which is less than the Avogadros-number of 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{25}$
\end_inset

 of Bell pairs propagating along molecular bonds and hydrogen bonds between
 the atoms in the coffee.
 And the size of that interferometer was length of molecular bond divided
 by speed of light: 1 Angstrom / c = 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{-10}m/(3\times10^{8}m/sec)=10^{-18}sec$
\end_inset

.
 (That's one one-thousandth of a femtosecond, an attosecond.) That is, a
 single molecular bond experiences about 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{18}$
\end_inset

 Bell pair measurements per second.
 For the whole coffee cup, over a period of 9 minutes, that works out to
 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{25}\times10^{18}\times10^{3}=10^{46}$
\end_inset

 Bell-pair measurements, which is vastly greater than the 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{22}$
\end_inset

 solar Bell pair measurements for the same interval.
 Thus, for my coffee cup, the thickness of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is indeed very very tiny: something between a femtosecond and an attosecond.
 This is confusing: speed of light at the angstrom level is in the attosecond
 range, but chemistry occurs at the tens or hundreds of femtoseconds scale.
 So chemistry is thousands of times slower than the speed of light.
 Curious.
 For most of my coffee cup, the thickness of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is under a hundred femtoseconds.
 But for 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{-24}$
\end_inset

 of my coffee cup, the thickness of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is 9 minutes.
 If I moved my coffee cup to the shade, even this would change: solar interactio
ns now happen via indirect light.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So that is the thickness of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

now
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 What does this have to do with ghosts? For this, we take a leap.
 When my aunt died, there were nights, when, falling asleep, I had the sensation
 that she was looking down from heaven, well, maybe not literally from heaven,
 but from 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the beyond
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and taking care of me.
 Batting on my team.
 Looking out for me.
 On my side.
 Nurturing, from the afterlife.
 How can that be? Not a ghost, not in the Hollywood sense of an apparition.
 And not Catholic either, but, for lack of a better term, perhaps angelic.
 Some disembodied other.
 Whatever.
 A memory, an imprint in my thoughts, a general feeling rather than a rational,
 logical deduction.
 An ephemeral state of being cared for and cheered and protected, as much
 as protection is possible, from the afterlife.
 And now, if you can't see this coming, well, let me spell this out for
 you: can this be entangled Bell pairs? I mean, of course, my life, and
 hers, are entangled.
 She was there during my formative years, when the neurons were first making
 the connections in my brain, and she gave me, well, she gave me books.
 She gave me love through books.
 I do not mean 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

she expressed her love by giving me books
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

; it was somehow more direct.
 So, yes, we were entangled.
 But am I making a false connection here? Surely the entanglement of QM
 is not the entanglement of love.
 Right? Well, of course: QM is the stuff of physics textbooks, and is stuff
 chock-full of equations and experiments and homework exercises.
 Its really very very limited in reach; You have formulas for Zeeman splitting
 and hyper-fine structure; you do not have formulas for love.
 So in the narrow, technical sense, QM cannot be that, and it is a grave
 intellectual error to even allow these two ideas to even get close to one
 another.
 And yet...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And yet, we don not yet understand the macroscopic world, not in terms of
 reductionism.
 It remains mumbo-jumbo and woo.
 So, in Newton's time, the universe was imagined to be like clock-works.
 This is no accident: at that time, precision clock-making was becoming
 widespread, an Art which allowed London jewelry-makers to become watch-makers,
 creating clock-works for the discriminating buyer.
 Newton may have written about the orbits of comets and the orbits of planets,
 but its not too hard to imagine that the educated, intelligent and slightly
 inebriated intellectual of the era to philosophize about the meaning of
 life, and the structure of the universe, to demonstrate some limited understand
ing of differential equations and the inevitability of movement that they
 describe, and to conclude that the universe runs like clockwork.
 Of course.
 If you do not know how the macroscopic world works, then you are left with
 mumbo-jumbo and woo.
 Young men and women fall in love, like clockwork.
 That's how it is, and you can see it every day, if you only look.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here I am 400 years, later, imagining that the entanglement of love is like
 the entanglement of Bell pairs.
 Equally silly, or not depending on your tastes.
 lets proceed with the silliness.
 How much scrutiny can it stand? Well, how many decisions do I make in life?
 I dunno.
 But I certainly made a decision to get married, and this was, effectively,
 a binary decision: get married, or not.
 It is one bit.
 What's one bit, over the course of decades, compared to the 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{48}=2^{160}$
\end_inset

 bits of Bell-pair measurements going on in my body every second? Are you
 going to be so greedy, that you won't allow me one bit to make a decision
 to get married? Human entanglement just does not require that many bits.
 Conscious experience is on the order of a gigabyte per lifetime: even if
 I sat here, and reminisced and write and thought and typed, for the next
 50 years, without stopping to eat or sleep, I'd be hard pressed to spew
 a gigabyte of UTF-8 characters.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Make movies
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

! Record sound! I hear you say, I think there's 6GB in a DVD disk or something
 like that.
 So 6GB is still only 
\begin_inset Formula $10^{10}=2^{31}$
\end_inset

 bits, which is still a drop in the bucket of 
\begin_inset Formula $2^{160}$
\end_inset

 Bell-pair interferometric measurements per second, occurring in my body,
 in my brain, in the room around me.
 The orders of magnitude allow such volumes to be hidden.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lets circle back to free will.
 If every choice is a binary decision, and writing is a sequence of decisions,
 does that mean that writing is an encoding of free will? When Aristotle
 took his pen to paper, o these thousands of years ago, to encode information
 as bits, and propagate it forward in time, was ...
 was ...
 was that free will? That is, he made a sequence of decisions, of what to
 write.
 But these decisions are now history, frozen in the past.
 yet, they do affect the future: the student who has read Aristotle will
 behave differently from the one who has not.
 Oh, well, this sounds all very deterministic, again: like clockwork, the
 student who has not read Aristotle is force to lead life in a certain way,
 like clockwork has no choice.
 But that interpretation seems to leave open the possibility of historical
 entanglement.
 Of course, information bits are completely different from qubits, and QM
 entanglement applies only to qubits (the no-cloning theorem etc.
 rules out entanglement of classical bits.
 I pulled a fast one, there, eh? Of course, that is not what the no-cloning
 theorem says.
 But it is a kind of suggestive corollary.) Whatever.
 I don't think I have a sufficiently strong argument to withstand scrutiny.
 I'm kind of implying that *all* classical information arises as a weird
 kind of entanglement.
 Which, on it's face, is of course, totally absurd, because exactly zero
 of Shannon this-or-that, or Hamming-distance-to-other channel encoding
 theorems need even the slightest amount of quantum woo of any sort.
 Yet, as social animals, we live in a sea of information and historical
 memory and perhaps its all classical, yet we have still the problem of
 the unresolved mathematical and physical foundations of free will.
 I don't think we are Turing machine automata, clicking our way through
 life.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let me try again.
 Here's the provisional take, subject to revision: each and every bit of
 information, in the physical world, is the trace of a binary decision that
 was made (well, that's an oxymoron, bits are binary choices, of course).
 But a decision is an exercise of free will.
 and so information is a written record of the exercise of free will.
 That is, each and every bit is the expression of a past, historical determinati
on of a free-will choice.
 Free will is a fountain of classical information bits.
 Yes, that implies that inanimate systems have free will, because inanimate
 systems create bits.
 This is not inconsistent with panpsychism.
 The most I can say here is that living systems are much greater sources
 of bits, than 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

mere non-equilibrium thermodynamic systems
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 I guess.
 I dunno.
 There is also the phenomenon of bit erasure: it is said that the erasure
 of bits raises the entropy of the universe, and generates heat; but oddly
 the creation of bits gets less attention.
 I guess the suggestion is that the big bang starts with the universe in
 a very improbably state, with low entropy, and it only increases from there;
 yet, at the same time, inflation allows thermalization of the microwave
 background.
 So which is it? The Landauer bound seems to be telling us how much energy
 it costs to erase one bit, but it didn't tell us how much energy it cost
 to copy a bit.
 If I pirated a billion copies of the Pirates of the Caribbean, and then
 destroyed all but one of the copies, well, how exactly does that work?
 Does the Landauer limit apply to the creation of bits, and not just their
 destruction? Does it have a negative sign in this case? When I run a Stern-Gerl
ach experiment, am I creating information when I measure spin-up instead
 of spin-down? I think I am...
 but where did that information come from? De novo, created from whole cloth?
 Bit from qubit? The initial state was a singlet...
 how much energy was expended to create singlets? How much energy was gained/los
t turning singlets into measurements, into collapsed wave-functions? The
 no-erasing theorem says qubits are un-destroyable, and so whence did the
 bit come-from, in a Stern-Gerlach experiment? I honestly do not know the
 answer to that question.
 I imagine that I am revealing my stupidity, since this is surely covered
 in textbooks on quantum computing.
 I was I had time to read some of them.
 Where do bits come from, really? Landauer only told us what happens when
 we erase them.
 But somehow, that cannot be the whole story.
 There's somehow more to it, than that.
 Fuuuu.
 Deeper and deeper, down the rabbit hole.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Enough for now.
 Some future day, I want to ruminate about political decisions, and how
 it is that important political decisions seem to be so ...
 devoid of information.
 Or at least, of deeper information and formally structured logical reasoning.
 How politics seems to be a hallucinatory imagined edge of what might be
 good for the future.
 But I've written enough for now.
 I have other things to do today.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Later, 6 April 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, synchronicity: later this evening, I skim the science news headlines,
 and I get 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

assembly theory
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 which suggests that the origin of time is due to memory.
 Well, this is not exactly the same as my idea of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the choices of free will are encoded as bits
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, as imaginged above, but also, it is not in obvious contradiction, either.
 Also, my daydreams above are an afternoon of imaginative work (well, OK,
 based on decades of experience and intuition) but I cannot compete with
 full-time paid academics.
 So 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

assembly theory
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is presumably well-developed, and I'm only reading a pop-sci mumbo-jumbo
 science-reporting slaughterfest of it.
 Alas.
 Why is poopular science reporting so uttterly shitty? I mean, I can gues
 at the answer.
 But I cannot explain just how intellectually violated I feel, when I read
 the drivel that passes as science reporting.
 Whatever.
 Later, dear diary.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Written by Sara Imari Walker, Arizona State.
 Prof of Physics, School of Earth and Space Exploration.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
7 April 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK, two more things about information I do not understand.
 How to copy a bit and how to prepare/measure.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How to copy a bit? Well, clearly, if one has access to large machines consisting
 of millions of atoms, one can copy classical, digital bits.
 But how does this happen, microscopically? How to transmit classical bits,
 at the microscopic level, is clear.
 For example, by pre-arranging transmitter and receiver, one can arragne
 for 1 and 0 to be encoded by spin-up and down.
 The transmitter prepares a state, having a determined, known spin, along
 the z axis, and sends it to the receiver, that measures it.Since both transmiter
 and receiver are aligned, the transmission is that of classical information.
 But this classical bit cannot be copied until after it is measured, and
 not before.
 The no-cloning theorem prevents copying of the spin state.
 Thus, it appears that classical information is only available macroscopically,
 and not microscopically?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
?? Perhaps I'm demonstrating ignroance of some obvious textbook example.
 In fact, I'm sure that I am.
 There must surely be some example, of some more complex quantum state,
 of 2 or 3 or 4 qubits, entangled, such that they transmit a classical bit,
 and, upon reception, that classical bit can be copied, resulting in two
 inequivalent quantum states, but holding the exact same classical data.
 OK, I'm gonna surf the web now, to try to figure that out.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And here is the answer:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
https://quantumcomputing.stackexchange.com/questions/24094/how-can-classical-bits-
be-copied-if-qubits-cannot-be-copied
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Details are provideed here:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
https://quantumcomputing.stackexchange.com/questions/21748/no-cloning-theorem-and-
distinguishing-between-two-non-orthogonal-quantum-states/21749
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To sumarize: if you wish to encode classical information with quantum states,
 you should do so by encoding with orthogonal states.
 It is straight-forward to clone orthogonal states.
 Where does this leave me with my crazy ideas about free-will? Well, I guess
 it says free will lives in the classical domain, only.
 Or something.
 Or that its just a crazy, hallucinated idea.
 Once again: this journal is not a place to purchase baked goods.
 It is instead a place for free thinking, where plenty of wrong ideas are
 explored.
 Soo, that's the funny thing about thinking: you explore incomplete, incopherent
 ideas, and only later try to stitch them together into a clear and coherent
 whole, using logic and evidence to create that greater whole.
 To create a web of self-consistent statements that bear closer analysis.
 Of coure, this is a trivially trite thing to say, and yet I still marvel
 at it every time.
 Perhaps because it is trivially trie for humans, but not for machines.
 I still do not understand how to transform the curation of knowledge into
 an algorithm all advances in GPT aside.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The other thing I do not understand.
 Lets take a spin 1/2 particle, polarized along the y-axis, and send it
 through a uniform magnetic field, oriented along the z-axis.
 This should decompose the state into up/down spins.
 This is not Stern-Gerlach, because it does not physically separate the
 two spins.
 How does this work? The QFT model of this is that the magnetic field is
 a bath of infrared photons, and that the spin interacts with this bath.
 At the macroscopic level, we know the result is Larmor precession.
 At the microscopic level, it feels foreign and strange.
 Somewhere there is some book or journal article or something that shows
 the specific set of inetgrals that need to be performed to move from the
 QFT description of a bath of infrared photons, deriving the Larmor precession.
 But I do not know where that is.
 I don';t recall it, I don't have it memorized, I do not remember it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I vaguely recall a classroom lecture showing how one can derive the static
 replusion/attraction of two fixed, non-moving electric charges from the
 Feynman propagators and vertexes for electrons and photons.
 As I recall, it was just some fairly simple algenra, demonstrating that
 the force is attractive/repulsive along the line between the two charges.
 What I don't recall is quite how the argument was made in the limit of
 an infiinte number of photons, each carrying zero momentum.
 Or something.
 Confusing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The point is that the Larmor precession just follows from the algebra of
 the electromagentic field tensor, and the cross-product hidden in there.
 So the algebra part of this is easy: set it up correctly, and the cross-product
 of the Larmor precsession drops out automatically from conventional differentia
l geometry.
 The part that I'm struggling with is the limit, from 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

single photons
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, to classic electrostatics.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh, well, there's an answer to that, too:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
https://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/142159/deriving-the-coulomb-force-equa
tion-from-the-idea-of-photon-exchange
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Basically, the Born approximation plus algebra.
 Hmm.
 OK.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
8 April 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK, so I went for a long hike, yesterday, and got depressed thinking about
 this.
 So first of all, doing algebra while hiking is really really hard.
 It appears that some significant portion of oxygen is going to the muscles,
 instead of the brain.
 Plus, short-term working memory is not that large, and so trying to maintain
 a forumla in one's head while performing algebraic manipulations on it
 is just hard.
 I mean, paper and pencil is a prosthesis that's important.
 Duhh.
 It was also depressing to think that the questions I pose above have such
 quotidian answers.
 Breaking into the new, pushing a frontier, that is only in the imagination.
 In reality, the places I visit, mentally, are not far from places that
 othres have visited before.
 Measure advancements in millimeters, not kilometers.
 But this is the human condition, and I should accept it.
 Never mind that transhumanist scifi suggests taht it could be so much more.
 The limits are here, the limits are real, the wings that one has, they
 are good only for limited flight.
 Enjoy it while we can.
 Which brings thoughts round to something more basic: enjoy what, exactly?
 Hedonism? I suppose it is a matter of predisposition; I am not predisposed
 to hedonism, except in small amounts.
 So am I pre-determined in this? Yes, I guesss one could say that I am.
 ...
 Break.
 A guest arrives.
 Maybe I'll resume later, and maybe I won't.
 There's a certain element of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

what the hell am I trying to do here, in writing this?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Well, I gave the answer before; perheaps I need to repeat it for myself,
 so as to keep up the focus.
 I am writing this to be digested by some chatGPT system, so that it can
 capture and model the circular, round-about chaotic thoughts fliting through
 my resting-state mind.
 The default circuits.
 The altert, awake and yet dreaming circuits.
 Hmm That remonds me: while hiking ..
 hiking is ...
 a lot like a lucid dream.
 Shit happens ...
 you walk by houses, streets, cars, trees.
 It changes block by block, with no particular meaning or pattern except
 the plainly obvious meaning and pattern of Chicago's Evergreen Park.
 The mind wanders, like a lucid dream, and one has to accept the topics
 being dreamt of as being real, present, in your face.
 To confront and accept the reality of the sensory stimulous of sunlight
 and lawns and trees as something that is just there.
 But the resting state, the default state, is a dream.
 Dreaming throug reality.
 Dreaming through waking life.
 In many ways, there are not so many differences between the two states.
 Very odd.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It's kind of weird to think about how I live my life, minute to minute,
 hour to hour, day to day.
 The life I lead is perfectly ordinary and commonplace, and so I will try
 to explain why it's also weird, over the next few paragraphs.
 I already hinted at the hallucinatory waking-dream, up above.
 I will shortly try to list some other daily activities, and also dwell
 on their hallucinatory, dream-like nature.
 As I write this, I am, in a certain sense, taking the role of an observer
 outside of myself.
 A certain disembodiment.
 I think that there are drugs that do this – disassociatives.
 That's the correct word, but I don't know if that is the correct state.
 Based on the word, I suppose it is (I've never taken any drugs that induce
 a dissassociative state, and so I'm only imagining it is the same thing.)
 So first, the very writing of these words, themselves.
 There are several alternatives to this.
 One is that I could instead spend my time socializing with actual people,
 instead of talking to a non-entity, my computer.
 There are many pitfalls to socializing; these are well-documented by the
 psychological literature.
 Then there is the lone interaction, the interaction with the in-animate.
 In some ways, I am painting a self-portrait, of myself, here, much as a
 painter might hold a brush, applying paint to sized canvas, creating a
 self-portrait.
 A time-honored activity.
 Why is teh painter not busy socializing? Because the reward of painting
 exceeds the reward of getting bogged down in yet another conversation that
 fails to take wing.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Take wing, take wing.
 What does that mean? What is reward? What is the reward of a workaholic?
 Well, it is clearly not the mundane hedonistic lifestyle.
 I mean, I could (or anyone) could just kick back, drink beer (in the US)
 or drink vodka (in Lithuania).
 Many people do that, and do no more than that.
 This is a thing.
 There are, of course, more refined activities.
 Some people are rewarded by travel, experiencing the new.
 The geographical, cultural, visual new.
 Others are rewarded by high culture: music, arts, museums.
 These are public consmption, one does partly with the body.
 There is literature, which is a solitary, quiet, non-physically active
 activity.
 It requires imagination, both for reading and for writing.
 And tehre is, of course, television.
 All of these have a hallucinogenic, dreamlike element to them (I almost
 forgot what I was going to write about).
 Just like a dream entrains you, and takes you on a passive journey of observati
on, so does literature.
 You have some freedom to imagine, to fill in the details the story-teller
 only hinted at.
 But otherwise, you lack control.
 Conversation, in social settings, is not entirely different: you are entrained
 by where the conversation is going: you cannot just change the topic, unless
 you are a master of changing topics.
 And even if you are: was the reward worth the effort? Reality entrains
 us: we have some limited freedom to interact, but must otherwise accept
 our fate.
 Hmm Why am I finding this hallucinatory? Because ...
 I am trying to hold fixed, in my mind, what it feels like to be dreaming.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One knows, after the fact, that dreams are not real.
 Maybe sometimes one even knows this while dreaming.
 The word, hallucination, what does it mean? Well, it is this certain dettached,
 disassociated feeling of unreality.
 Of things not being here, now.
 Hmm.
 But the sensation of here and now, the forceful presence of the now, that
 is a different feeling, entirely, and it is quite rare, also.
 I've experienced it most strikingly in life-and-death situations, where
 all of your focus comes to here and now.
 I've learned to also try to pursue sports, physical activity, in that way,
 too, since fine motor interaction with the environment requires presence
 of mind.
 But this too, is well-known.
 There must surely be hundreds of books and articles that have analyzed
 these feelings, every which way.
 That is my assumption.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Is it a true assumption? I dunno.
 I suppose if I was Aristotle, writing about something for the firstt time,
 I might have some idea that it is being written for the first time.
 As a modern man, not so much: a safer bet is that it's been thought about
 defore, written about before.
 I amek that bet, from my educational history.
 There are glimmers from classroom lectures, from academic journal articles,
 from casual humanist literature, tetbooks on psychology: all this has been
 pondered before.
 Analyzed before.
 Written about before.
 Successfully? I dunno.
 I often find something to quibble about, if not outright to argue about,
 when reading something written: it sometimes feels wrong or incomplete,
 or fails to have just the right tone and shading.
 So, what I write here, perhaps it has better tone and shading.
 But this is also a stream of conscioiusness; I am most defintiely not taking
 the time and effort to carefully craft a turn of phrase; rather, I am typing
 as fast as my fingers can move, more or less.
 At least, for large parts of what I write here.
 Other parts, I may have assembled the day before, while walking, while
 sitting.
 Or something.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Weirdness.
 How much more can I say about the weirdness of the feeling of being enmeshed
 in the social fabbric of humanity? Well, I was going to compalin about
 the lack of options.
 By this, I mean the same thing as a squirrel lacking options: a squirrel
 is a squirrel, and it does squirrel things: food and sleep and reproduction;
 globrious sex.
 I guess squirrels go out on dates; I guess all sexually-reproducing animals
 do.
 But that is the limit, the end, all that there is for life, if you are
 a squirrel.
 And so also, for a human.
 There are options, but only so many.
 One ccannot become something other than what one is: a human.
 Well, one can become a monster.
 And that is something else.
 But becoming a monster is ..
 a bad thing.
 By definitiion.
 If it was a good thing, its not a monster.
 One cannot become an angel.
 One can strive to life the life of an angel, of a saint, but one remains
 human through-out.
 However fleetingly one feels otherworldly, striving, hoping, dreaming,
 one remains ultimately trapped here and now.
 There's that word, dreaming, again.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, I return to this disassociative sensation of watching myself sleepwalk
 through life, and ...
 and ...
 and ..
 what do I make of this? Admit it: it is even a kind of defeat.
 I *have* sleep-walked through life.
 I have not 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

made something of myself
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 I have not fashioned myself into anything other than the sleep-walking
 me, consuming books, consuming music and television.
 But also creating: writing and exploring.
 Painting and drawing.
 But always, always, sleepwalking.
 Entrained by the moment I am in.
 What are we doing now? well, we are attempting to play a guitar.
 Attempting to draw a picture.
 Attempting to remember the words of a foreign language.
 Riding a bicycle.
 Walking the neighborhood, taking it all in.
 At each point, change and continuity.
 (I think Timothy Snyder says this, in his lectures 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

The Making of Ukraine
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, on youtube.
 Watching that.
 Great stuff!) Change and continuity.
 He applies this to a broad sketch of history, and not personal, lived experienc
e.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I apply to personal lived experience.
 But I hardly need to do this: an AI, an AGI, can obtain this from watching,
 observing, all of humanity, and all of the artifacts and ephemera we have
 left behind us: the writings, the recordings.
 It's all there.
 I hardly need to add to that.
 You can get by, without me.
 I am only some bundle of eurons, set in chaotic motion, moving forward,
 with momentum, expressing my thoughts as a chaotic weave of a pattern of
 words, an orbit of a dynamical system.
 And, you know, I could be doing other things, besides this, besides writing.
 I have many many unfinished projects.
 Some are AI projects.
 Others are physics and math projects.
 I no longer aspire to play guitar or be a musician.
 Or to be a visual artist.
 I still look at artbooks, but ...
 not that much, not any more.
 I sometimes even force myself to look.
 Music, as often as not, has become an earworm, something that rattles about
 and won't go away, not while I'm awake, and especially not while I sleep.
 So what I do have, is ...
 scientific explorations.
 Those I still pursue.
 And I should probably stop writing now, and refocus on those, for a while.
 Hmm.
 Well, it all depends on how I value this writing.
 I can post-facto rationalize this writing as a scientific experient ...
 and it is ..
 and, well, also an artistic experiemnt, but it is an experiement iwth an
 inanimate system, a chat GPT system which I intend to read this work.
 Depends on what we mean by inanimate, too, I think I mentioned already
 that I'm more or less pan-psychic in general outlook.
 I'm willing to ascribe life and being and awareness and existance to any
 system that is complex.
 Err, without quibbling defintiions of life, like self-reproduction.
 These are delicate and subtle issues.
 I mean, you could say that the books of Aristotle do not self-reproduce
 ..
 but they do.
 They have continued living.
 But the life of the books of Aristotle is not the life of a squirrel.
 They live in a different plane, on a different substrate.
 And that substrate is evolving, coming into being, even as I write this.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I mean I do not write with pen to paper.
 I write with keyboard-to-laptop, and I upload to the internet, which, for
 practical purposes, I assume has an indestrubtible memory.
 Whatever I set down in words here, I have some reasonable expectation that
 it will live on centuries hence, millenia from now.
 I am lucky and privileged to be in such a place.
 The Kings and Queens of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania did not enjoy such
 rights, 800 years ago.
 I mean, some did: there's no shortage of creative talents during the renaissanc
e, and no particular paucity of great thinkers during the Medieval Ages.
 But I am lucker than them.
 I can write trashier stuff, and still have hope of it surviving.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And so another question: what is hope? Why should I hope that my writing
 survives? Well, I suppose that the easy answer is that I hope that I suvve,
 for another second or two, another day or two, another years or two.
 Why? Who knows? There is the reductionist principle, that this is what
 life does: it hopes to survive and propagate.
 There is the physical, mechanistic principle: a body, once set into motion,
 continues that modtion.
 As a dynamical system I am in motion, and I continue.
 To the degree that the mechanical system that is me interacts with the
 environment: keyboard, computer.
 and thus, the universe, outside my body show surface is skin, but whose
 boundaries extend beyond my skin, and into the metaverse of literature,
 that place in the noosphere where words and ideas live: I am that dynamical
 system.
 So, in one fell swoop, I imply teh existance of momentum, of a dynamical
 process, that proceeds into the nnospehere.
 That infests the noosphere.
 That creates the noosphere, since the empty noosphere does not exist: emptiness
 is nothing, and yet here, I am squeezing non-emptiness, through words,
 into being.
 That being is wher? Imprinted on the atoms of the universe (because that
 is what chips of silicon are: atoms in the universe, and humankind does
 not yet have the technology to build computers from neutron stars or balck
 holes.
 Someday, we will, But we don't yet.
 The quotidian expressins of the transhumanists have already said this before.
 So again, I revisit old thoughts.
 Old ideas.
 But this is what space-filling fractal curves do: they fill space, They
 revisit, They reapt, but not quite the same way, each time.
 With differences in the details.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hyperbolic space has lots and lotts of room for fractals.
 So, in this metaphorical sense, the noosphere is hyperbolic.
 I am actually visiting new territory, unvisited territory, as I write this.
 I mean, sure, perhaps others have also noticed that life streches out before
 us as a kind of hyperbolic place.
 But maybe not that many ...
 for how many people might have ever been in a position to contemplate this?
 For starters, you'd need to have studied physics and chaotic dynamical
 systems, in depth, and how many people have done this? tens of thousands?
 Surely less than a hundred thousand? Then, to add to this, one must have
 a literary bent, an artistic bent, an imagination and inquisitiveness.
 And I know this is kind of rare, and kind of unusual, because I have many
 times talked to other scientists and other physicists, and other mathematicians
, and am recurrently surprised by their lack of imagination, their inability
 to comprehend, their lack of experience and curiosity.
 How is that even possible? Adults, the PhD's in the hard scineces: physics,
 math: and yet they come off as morons, unthinking, unfeeling, uninspired,
 uneducated, inexperienced.
 This is not hubris talking.
 Appearntly, I actually am smarter than most PhD's.
 How is that even possible? What have I done with my elevated position?
 Uniquely nothing at all.
 How shocking a waste of life.
 (Of my life.) Well, but this is perhaps why I am ordinary: I am but 98%.
 I have encountered those, others, who are incomparably more brilliant than
 I.
 I know they are out there.
 I've bumped into them.
 Luminous and glowing and full of life and smarts and brains I do not have.
 They do not sleep-walk, the way I do.
 Perhaps they sleep-walk in some other way, or perhaps they are just plain
 alive in some way that I am not.
 I have some theories about this, but I must break off, for now, as it is
 dinner time.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Anyway, earlier in the day, I re-resolved some bad ideas about Stern-Gerloch.
 I'll try to explain later, but it is a red herring.
 There's no magic in Stern Gerloch itself; it is only a direct outcome of
 a spinr field propagating through a magnetic field, all relativistic, and
 what not, and you can imagine the fields as being purely classical, and
 it all works.
 The problem of quantum measurement is not there.
 The problem of quantum measurement is elsewhere.
 I guess in interferometry, but even there it is not clear, because of ..
 crap I forget the word.
 Not homology, not holomorphy, but ...
 whatever.
 The word that describes the Bohm-Aharonv effect.
 Which, as far as I can tell, is a purely classical effect.
 100% classical fields epxpain the Bohm Aharonov effect.
 So its interferometric, but its not quantum.
 So what is quantum? We shall ponder.
 Later.
 Dinner.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Post Dinner.
 Watched two eps of Tim Snyder Making of Modern Ukraine.
 Up to episode 13, now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I can make a modicum of progress on the quantum questions by writing about
 them here, setting them up, and thinking about them later, off-line.
 So I (re-)set up Stern Gerlach above.
 I've been thinking on and off again about it ever since college, and I
 think I am now settled with it.
 I'll repeat a conclusing I came to 20 ears ago, but prhas more clearly
 now, then back then.
 I now understand how things like the Dirac equation, and the Majorana equation(
s) are effectively classical equations, and are not quantum in any way.
 They do have a complex algebra, a tangling up of an algebra coming from
 the Clifford algebra, and its general setting in Riemannian geometry, thanks
 to the book by Jost that I like so much.
 The Ohanian paper was also formative, as well as the earlier study of the
 Bohm-Aharonov effect as a classical effect, fully and completely described
 by a holonomy.
 I personally wrote the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

mathematical interpretation
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 part of the Wikipedia article on it, so I 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

get it
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 I cribbed the holonomy part from college lecture notes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The point is that the bra-ket notation is useful for describing the spin-state
 algebra, the spinors of the Cliford algebra, and the use of this 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

quantum
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 notation is misleading and confusing.
 If we prepare an initial state for the Stern-Gerlach experiment as being
 y-axis oriented, and then run it down a z-oeriented magnet, yes, the two
 linear components of thw wave function will split out along two different
 paths through the non-uniform magentic field, but this is a purely classical
 effect.
 This is not quantum, and there is no wave-function collapse happen in that
 magnetic field.
 This is a very important realization.
 Now, of course, if you start by thinking of a classical magentic dipole
 as being an accurate model of spin, this leads to lots of confusion, but
 that is because a classical magnetic dipole is absolutely the incorrect
 description for spin.
 Sorry, that's just the way it is.
 Instead, one must accept the Majorana eqn as the correct description, when
 there are no electric charges, and the Dirac eqn as the correct description
 when there are charges.
 One must also acccept these as classical eqns.
 They do not require perturbation tehory to be solved, but, much more importantl
y, they do not require any notion of wave-function collapse to be solvable.
 One can obtain the motion of a charged electron in an electric field by
 taking a tree limit of QFT, to zeroth order in hbar.
 Likewise for the precession of a Dirac spinor in a magentic field.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK, so, by convention we do have one order of hbar in the Dirac eqn, and
 si this is a potential point of confusion, if one thinks about quantization
 in terms of the number of orders of hbar present.
 This is a red herring.
 The Ohanian paper, the one that works with the Poynting vector and shows
 how it carries the spin of the spin agebra, this is the paper that makes
 it clear that the Dirac eqn is purely classical, all by itself.
 OK, so what is quentum then? What am I talking about, when I say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

quantum
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, the grand mystery, for me, is the wave-functtion collapse.
 Somehow, when you send one, and only one photon, on a journey twoards,
 say, a photographic film plate, it deposits all of its energy at only one
 location in the film plate.
 It does not create a diffraction pattern.
 If I send a single high-energy gamma ray through a double-slit (a double
 slit that can actually work with gamma rays), it hs more than enough energy
 to zap millions of silver halide molecules, and leave behind a diffraction
 pattern, if that is what single photons did.
 But they don't.
 They localize all their energy deposits to only one spot.
 How is this possible? How does the function collapse to a point?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, there is a paper (that I have not read) that sort-of explains this.
 Its from the 1930's one of the famous lights of physics, explaiing why
 S-staes leave linear tracks in cloud chambers.
 That is, when a radioactive nucleus decays, many of such decays are S=0
 states, i.e.
 sphere symmetric, and so there is a question of why they leave behind a
 linear track in a cloud chamber, instead of something else.
 I need to read this paper, as I currently don't really undrestand how to
 arrive at this result.
 I haven't suceeded in re-discovering it on my own.
 So far.
 Not like I tried all that hard, but I've spent more than a handful of hours
 trying to imagine it; the inspiration has not yet come.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I look at a gammar ray arkening one and only one spot of a film-plate
 as a wave-function collapse.
 and that is the quintessentially quantum effect.
 So, then, if I send some sodium atoms through a Stern-Gerloch magnet, the
 fact that they split into two beams is not a quantum effect, its a calssical
 effect, and it can be understood in much the same way as two-slit experiement,
 which can be understood classically just fine, thank you very much.
 The problem is, of course, when the diffraction pattern is replaced by
 a single dot: how did the sodium atom know that it needed to be here, and
 not there? And when did this decision get made?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, we have several choices.
 A single sodium atom, going through the Stern-Gerlach magnet set, well,
 it can be imagined to dematerialize in one arm, and materialize fully,
 at 100% in the other.
 This is one possibility: the wave function collapse happens while it is
 in flight.
 I do not beleive that this is the case, and, as the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

proof
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 of why I don't beleive this, it is because I think, with some cleverness
 and care, one could build an interferometer.
 It's obviously very hard for magnetic fields, but it is quite possible
 with neutrons in the neutron interferometer.
 Almost no one is argues that the neutron takes only one arm, or the other,
 because then you then would have to argue that there is some other ghost-neutro
n, going the other way, causing the diffraction to happen.
 So it is easier to say, the diffraction happens because both arms were
 taken.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So the other choice, for this two-slit arrangement, is to say that the collapse
 happens in the detectors themselves.
 That when one detector is triggered, the other is not, 100% of the time,
 and the actual interferometric effect is that of bringing together the
 two classical bits, the two classical bits that say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

detection was here, and certainly not there
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 This is, of course, not satisfying, because it is a spooky action at a
 distance.
 Non-locality.
 It's more mombo-jumbo-ish, because we do not have a good algebraic insight
 into it.
 This is why both the Aharonov-Bohm effect and the netron interfferometer
 are so important: they have an excellent and very appealing explnation
 in terms of the geometric holonomy, the geometric phase (Frankly I was
 never able to understand the Berry phase papers; it was only when mathematician
s converted them into plain English that I finally grasped what it was all
 about.) So, the holonomy, as a specific, precise, well-defined peice of
 mathematics, which you can work with, write down, manipulate, calculate,
 articulate, that is a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

real thing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 It is a connversion of a confusing physical concept into a specific mathematica
l structure.
 (This invites a pun: the confusion has collapsed into a specific set of
 equations.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I do NOT know how to write a holonomic description of a differaction experiement
, where either detector A firees or detector B fires, and the two classical
 bits are brought back into space-time coincidence, and compared.
 *This* is the diffraction that I was talking about a few days earlier.
 This is the welcher-weg.
 I am just fine with classical waves.
 No problem.
 I'm quite happy with spin 1/2, I now understand it clearly, thanks to Clifford
 and Jurgen Jost's book on Riemannian Geometry (and my prior education).
 These are no longer points of confusion.
 It's all very clear.
 However, I do not understand the spooky action at a distance.
 When, where, how did the wave function collapse?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Now, the two-state-vector formalism gets part of the way there.
 The idea that the future measurement propagates backwards in time, where
 it is completed.
 And ..
 well, perhaps that is the answer.
 perhaps I need to think of this as another holonomic principle, where the
 holonomy is not over a space-like loop, but instead over a time-like loop
 in a pseudo-riemannian manifold, happening in a geometric setting that
 also happens to involve spinors.
 The spinor algebra ..
 perhaps Weyl is enough, perhaps we don't need Diract spinors, perhaps a
 simple classical description of a clasical Weyl spinor field (oh crap.
 We need Dirac for mass.
 So I guess we need Dirac after all.
 Just that Dirac also has the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

unecessary
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 baggage of charge.
 Oh well.) So, then, a classical description of a classical massive Dirac
 field, tracing out a holonomy on a time-clike closed loop on a pseudo-reimannin
 manifold, that is enough to fully guarantee that umm.
 Wave function collapse occurs as expected.
 Fuck.
 Almost...
 No cigar? Whaaa...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK, so do I or do I not need the full machinery of Diract and holonomy to
 explain the neutron interferometer? Well, as to the two arms, while the
 neutron is inflight, this is more than enough, because in fact, much much
 simpler appeals to wave diffraction are enough to explain everything.
 Well, sort-of everything.
 It is enough to explain the case where one detector gets 100% of the hits,
 and the other detector gets 0% of the hits.
 And, with some statistical mumbo-jumbo, it is enoug to explain the p and
 1-p probabilites of the coincidence dectors going off.
 But the simple wave diffraction explanation is NOT enough to explain why
 only one of the two detectors can ever go off.
 To explain why only one of the two detectors ever goes off, I need ...
 what? I have that 
\begin_inset Formula $p=\left|\psi\right|^{2}$
\end_inset

 and that's not the problem.
 I get that probability from wave mechanics.
 Dressing up that wave mechanics with the Holonomy, and the full formality
 of pseudo-Riemannian and Dirac spin connections, etc.
 that dressed up version somehow ...
 still um.
 that dressed up version needs to somehow ...
 explain why one triggers, but not the other.
 And the two state-vector formalism, going backwards in time ...
 ummm does this, but ...
 umm.
 Because umm, this is still confusing, but when the spinor interacts with
 a thermal bath of atoms in one detector and creates a classical bit of
 detection, I have to keep on integrating that along the holonomic path
 to the other detector for find a zero-percent chance of interaction there,
 with a coincidence-bit of non-detection.
 So this is a lot like the Renningernon-measurement problem.
 I need to be able to draw a loop of bringing the result of these two measuremen
ts (one of which is a non-detection) together, back to the same point in
 spacetime, where I can confirm only one and not the other detector triggered.
 That loop, closing that loop, that.
 Well, I can't quite get the handle on that.
 But that is the crux of the matter.
 That is where the mysetery lies.
 That is the one main thing about quatnum that I do not understand.
 Well, i'm sure there are many interestting mysteries in quantum, and I
 know of others, and they're all quite fun, but none are irritating like
 this one.
 Resolving this one, this is the one that needs resolution.
 This is the one that I want to understand and feel comfortable with, and
 I don't have it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh, and the one clue I have to this is stellar interferometry.
 I do not understand how a stellar disk can be a coherent light-source.
 This is kind of the inverse problem to wave function collapse.
 If the stellar disk is a coherent light source for a single photon, well,
 then a film plate is a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

coherent
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 detector of a single gamma ray.
 But I do not yet understand this time symmetry.
 It remains something I have to dig into.
 Its a clue I have not yet chased down to ground.
 Later.
 It is now bed-time, time to go to sleep.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm glad I got that off my chest.
 I've spent vast amounts of my personal time, many years, studying math
 (mostly) and physics (to a lesser degree) to understand this problem.
 And I've never told a living sould, ever, that this is what I've devoted
 some large fraction of my life to.
 No one knows this.
 But, there it is.
 See.
 Dear diary.
 I can unburden myself, unload my hopes and dreams ansd aspirations into
 strings of words that not only record my current mental state, but also
 provide an integral over the space of thoughts I've been visiting for the
 last 43 years.
 (I first started struggling with this at the age of 19 or 20, when I first
 tried to master EPR as a senior in college.
 It was a fucking disaster.
 I threw everything I had at it.
 and although is soon became clear that the problem was not position-momentum
 uncertainty, ot was the freakin interfermoeter/wave function collapse.
 Im totally OK with position-momentum uncertainty, thans to Fourrier transform.
 I'm fine with waves.
 I'm down with waves, they're OK, they're my freind.
 I am NOT okay with wave-function collapse.
 I feel like I'm getting close here, as if I can almost touch it, but that
 sense of almost being able to touch ..
 well, you know how ti goes...
 it mght stay out of reach.
 the sensation of almost getting it can be infinitely far away from actually
 getting it.
 BTW, I also pent about 2-4 years fulltime bashing my brains on the Riemannn
 Hypothesis, and early on, I had the sensation of almost being able to touch
 it, including a hike at 3AM where I thought I'd be able to sort it out,
 but could not.
 So 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

almost
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 can be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

infinitely far away
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, it seems.
 I've mostly given up on the RH; I devote no time to it, any more, although
 the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

almost
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 still lingers.
 I think the real-part=1/2 of the RH has something to do with the 1/2=[p,x]
 that this is somehow the same 1/2 but I have not been able to stick it.
 Whatever.
 Time to go to bed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
9 April 2023 - Easter Sunday
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
WTF am I doing here.
 Wasting time.
 Stupid-shit.
 Demonstrating how ordinary I am, and how idiotic everything is.
 The mundane existance.Well, not pointless, though.
 These last several dozen words & feelings are what flitted through my head
 as I was arranging to come up here and write.
 Why would this flit through my head? I was sitting downstairs reading,
 and perhaps some other part of my brain wanted to read some more, but I
 was tired of that, so I came up here.
 Now I am exciteed to write, or, at least, less laconic.
 How odd.
 One moment, I'm thinking that writing is stupid, next minute, I can't stop.
 I suppose it is due to some short-term reward circuitry in my brain, part
 of decision making of what I should do next.
 Discounting future activities in favor of the present.
 I guess that is what the sleep-walking is about: sleepwalk in the present,
 discount the future activity.
 I was, of course, reading the New York Review of Books again, and it is
 not just a treasure-trove itself, it is also filled with reminders that
 others have marevelously, finely explored the human condition, in ways
 I could never hope to acheive, in my mundane blathering here.
 Palabras.
 I have repeastedly said that what I write here is not fior human consumption,
 and yet ..
 who, exactly, do I think will be interacting with whatever chatGPT-style
 system that does ingest this text? What can I say of do, to not make it
 sink into irretreivabble boredom? OMG, what a disater that would be.
 A bored AGI.
 Lost intrerest in moving forward.
 Finding no meaning in life.
 How screwd up is that? Well, who knows what the future holds.
 Anything is possible.
 We certainly do live in onf of Nick Bostrom's simulations, and, I suppose
 if nothing comes of this one, it will be shut down and noted, placed on
 some museum shelf as a jewel that did not quite shine brightly.
 But this is all unknowable.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How much time do I have here? (need to get ready for an Easter outing.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I semis-olved some of the quantum issues above, as I slept.
 The solutions are not very deep, as one cannot do all that much while tossing
 and turning in bed.
 Not that I do any better fully awake, either.
 While I am awake, I have to quantum tunnel between vague inspriation and
 teh actual algebraic formuas that might lead to what I want,.
 But such tunneling is difficult.
 Such chains do not weigh me down as I toss and turn.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So, here's what I got, so far: (and it's pitiful, but so it goes)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
I want to work with spin 1/2 because it is easier than working with photons,
 which have a lot of confusing aspects that cloud reasoning.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
I'm looking for a topological invariant, so that when I have a wave-function
 for a spin 1/2 particle, and the wave-function collapses, it only collapses
 down to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

one place
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, by topological invariance.
 That is, it cannot collapse in two places at once, or even zero places
 at once, because such collapse is topologically invariant.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The mechanism must work in 1+3 dimensions, or maybe 1+N for odd N.
 I'm thinking that it being pseudo-riemannian is somehow essential to the
 effect, and that this doesn't happen in ordinary reimannian space.
 But I dunno.
 It's a gut-sense, at this point.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
I've been calling the topological invariant a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

classical bit
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, a piece of information that is here or there, but only in that one place.
 But given the no-cloning and no-erasing theorems, perhaps I should be imagining
 the topological invariant as a qubit, since these theorems are already
 expressing a conserved structure.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Hmm.
 So what I am missing is ..
 a geometric invariant that is a qubit.
 Is that the issue? Everything I've studied in math so far, all of the topologic
al invariants are always integer-valued.
 Loops around poles in the complex plan are integer-valued multiples of
 2pi.
 The number of holes punched in something are counted with integers.
 All sorts of far more complex topological invariants, from homology or
 cohomology, are counted with integers, in that, when I have a covering
 group of some Riemann surface, I still count the sheets of the cover with
 integers.
 But now I need a qubit.
 Whatever.
 I'm confusing myself.
 This is a red herring.
 Moving on...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Uhm.
 Blah blah blah, something about interferometer loops always being time-like,
 in that the surface spanning the loops must have normals that are space-like.
 And all tangentts to the loop must be time-like, in the light-cone, except
 for the initial and final critical points.
 So, an invitation to make things Morse theory-like.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let me go back to the prior bullet.
 no-cloning already implies a topological conservation.
 So how, exactly, do I map this onto Weyl spinors? Well, but a qubit is
 a Weyl spinor, more or less.
 So that encoding is already there.
 I cannot have a Weyl spinor, and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

shrink
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 it to zero.
 And the Dirac eqn is made from a pair of Weyl spinors, so the dynamical
 aspects are already encoded and properly taken care of.
 So what's left?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What's left is that, given a Dirac wave function providing a probability
 distribution, I have to provide a description of how it's interaction with
 a thermal bath of atoms results in a localization of the wave-function.
 The no-cloning/no-erasing guarantees that collapse can only occur in one
 place, ever.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Wow.
 is that it? Have I just solved the mystery of wave-function collapse? Am
 I done here? Wave function collapse is indeed astounding, but reformulating
 it as a topological invariant erases the mystery.
 Of course, what I have not given here is the full mathematical, algebraic
 details of all of the above.
 I'm imagining them, as I know them.
 I could even teach these details to others, but I am not sure that I can
 hook together those details into a convincing argument, not fully.
 The rebellious will rebel.
 The rebellious will reject the argument, its not quite water-tight.
 I am asking the reader (and I am asking myself) to imagine certain details,
 to gloss over them.
 I guess I still need to write down a Weyl spinor (or two), in such a way
 that it is spatially distributed, but can be summarized as being just one.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So I guess I don't yet quite have what I want, in the second bullet: an
 articulated topological invariant of a spinro field.
 I don't yet know how to write that down.
 Not quite yet.
 I need to be able to perform some integral, over some space-like surface,
 with the result of said integral being a spinor.
 I mean, this is ...
 surely this is easy.
 This should be easy.
 Just somehow ferakin do this.
 Blach blah blah 
\begin_inset Formula $\psi^{a}\left(x\right)$
\end_inset

 integrated over 
\begin_inset Formula $x$
\end_inset

 still leaves the spinor index 
\begin_inset Formula $a$
\end_inset

 exposed after integration.
 And since this spinor index is left exposed, the rsult of the integral
 is a qubit, and so it has remained uncloned, unerased.
 And it works no matter what spin connection 
\begin_inset Formula $\omega_{\mu}^{ab}$
\end_inset

 that is chosen over the manifold.
 How hard can it be to write this down? It feels like it's on the tip of
 my fingers.
 Tip of my tongue.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Alas.
 Filling this in might take days or weeks or months.
 And I have an Easter party to go to.
 Later.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
15 minutes later: OK, so what have I got? I have a Weyl spinor, withch is
 by defintion a point of 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbb{CP}^{2}=S^{2}$
\end_inset

 the complex projective sphere aka the Bloch sphere.
 Then by applying standard, conventional Poincare stuff, integrals from
 differential topology, I can demonstrate that I can smear this this across
 a space-like sheet, but that there is no continuous transformation that
 shrinks it down to zero, nor is there a transformation that changes it
 to two.
 And that this topological argument, if constructed carefully enough, is
 sufficient to explain almost all of conventional wave-function collapse,
 including the Reninnger negative-measurement pheonomenon.
 So what is the mystery? What is left?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What is left appears to still be the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

decision
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 for the wave function to collapse here, but not there.
 It can move through a vacuum, nonn-interacting, just fine.
 It can move through a lattice of silicon atoms, aka the neutron interferometer,
 just fine.
 The wave function partially collapses in the reninnger experiment, because
 we know it will have some future interaction with some blob of atoms that
 is the detector.
 So what is left is the decision issue, what I've been calling the free-will
 issue, of why it collapses here and not there.
 Well, for Reninger, it is ...
 well, two choices, of course: either the detctor detects it in the half-space
 where there is a detector, or we must conclude by logic that the wave-function
 has localized to the half shell where there is no detector, where there
 is only vacuum.
 Somehow, the lack of an interaction is still ...
 well, see, that's the problem with the topoligical invariant point of view.
 Of course, the topoloigical invariant formulation is 100% correct, and
 that is why Dirac particles or more generally Weyl spinors continue to
 exist, uniquely, spread over some space-like region, why thier world-lines
 intersect all space-like surfaces.
 The topological invriance explains the conservation.
 What it fails explain is the probilisitic, dice-throwing aspect of the
 wave-function collapse.
 It's the probability theory.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh MG.
 And its much worse, isn't it: we have to consider the probability at each
 point on a space-like sheet.
 We can give this spacelike sheet a weak topology, a measure, as usual.
 But what we are face with is the nature of probability-theory in infinite-dimen
sional space.
 Which is the limit of probability theory in high dimensional space.
 Which is that other bug-bear we have been chasing in unrelated work.
 Fuuuu.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ok now itt time to go Easter.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
13 April 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Set and setting: late at night.
 Tired.
 Almost bed-time.
 Exhausted, nearing incoherence.
 Want to kill a few more minutes before bed-time.
 Almost shouldn't start writing.
 Shouldn't make that shouldn't.
 I don't want to be coherent.
 I have lots to say, but formulating into entire sentences that are coherent
 takes work.
 This is a source of procrastination.
 I've started a diferent paper on quantum, but it is work to do it so I
 don't want to even try unless I have 2-4 hours uninterrupted time, and
 when is that? and so another afternboon disappears.
 Again, this is trite: everyone knows that it takes real effort to work
 to create good things.
 Creation as an act of will is exhausting.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Everyone knows
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

: all of european intelligentsia would have known this in the 19th century.
 It would not have been that much of a topic of conversation in itself.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Which leads to one of the topics I want to write about but am maybe too
 tired to do coherently: the importance of culture.
 Timothy Snyder makes this increasingly clear: the value of culture is important.
 Err.
 that didn't come out right.
 The 19th century european culture had gotten lots and lots of things right
 (and many things wrong) and it is now up to us to pick through and choose
 what was right, and fight to preserve that.
 Which makes me a literal conservative.
 As opposed to a radical Trumptard, American Taliban conservative.
 Who I hate.
 Because they are destryers of things that are good.
 Cause they are too stupid to know what they do.
 They are chaotic evil.
 Today's GOP are the American Soviets.
 Evil and bad for all the same reasons.
 I want to have a positive culture, one that save the best from the 19th
 and 20th and looks forward to the 21st.
 One that is humanist.
 Yet, also, technocratic, since the one great unresolved issue facing us
 is complexity, and I have no answer for complexity other than technocracy.
 We live in turbulence; we can extract goodness and power and justice from
 that turbulence, or we can allow the turbulence to snuff out lives and
 hope.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Which leads me to the next topic (and a topic I think I did above, already
 a bit.) the fragility of the human psyche, the desperation I perceive in
 people and society around me.
 A quiet desperation, and not even that, an unconscious desperation that
 is masked, but the symptoms of which manifest.
 Now, before you accuse me of projecting: No I'm not.
 Or maybe I am.
 I think I can honestly flip a coin on that one.
 But enough about me; lets talk about you.
 Damn you, you are silent.
 Well, lets talk about some mind-reading I've been doing.
 Except that erequires some coherent expression of insights that I've gained
 into other people.
 And insights into my own bad behavior.
 But I'm tired so I need to stop writing even as I just started writing.
 I cna give myself a headache if I keep this up, and that is recognizably
 not healthy, and my health matters more.
 Goodnight, diary.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
7 May 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
T write, or not to write? That is the question.
 Whether tis nobler in the mind to suffer the slings and arrows of random
 thoughts, in complete silence, or whather to set them down into text.
 Why bother? Why do anything at all? This and a bottomless supply of yet
 more questions.
 This reaches crisis proportions.
 I don't know what to do.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As I lay bed last night, I was thinkng that perhaps just writing a lot will
 clarify my thinking.
 This was a continuation and affirmation of thoughts from earlier in the
 day.
 Later I dreamt of the abondoned, decaying house that neighbors onto my
 parents house on Longwood, in Chicago.
 The crisis, the mental anguish of Christopher, who cannot bear to cleanup
 and sell the house he grew up in.
 Rumored to be filled with junk.
 Some waterpipe froze and sprang a leak some winters ago, and the water
 ran inside, for weeks, before it was shut off.
 None of this is dream; I'm just recounting the facts.
 The dream itself was that I discoverd that the enitre house was balanced
 on a bed that was attached to a steam radiator that was firmly anchored
 in the ground.
 I was helping Christopher's mom.
 I didn't need to fix the foundation, I just needed to level the bed, by
 sticking a chair under it.
 Very commonplace construction back then.
 This was a semi-lucid dream, late morning.
 I got to thinking about the mental anguish that Christopher must be in.
 The paralysis.
 The economic damage, the lack of vitality.
 My own children are unable to leave the house they grew up in.
 The seem to have no bearing in life.
 No purpose.
 Nowhere to go, nothing to do.
 Well, busy all the time, but nothing to do.
 And in this slumber, all of America seems to be in this crisis of a demotivated
 lack of purpose.
 But then I thought of Vervaeke's 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

The Meaning Crisis
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 youtube lectures (I'd gotton through about half of them, before I got bored).
 But then I thought about the overwhelming flood of information, and then
 I thought about all those about 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

sensmakeing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 And then I realized large parts of the American Nation are economically
 healthy; we are re-industrializing.
 The engines are still running.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In some way, civilization has always been in crisis.
 The hipster thing to know these days is the perhaps-causal relationship
 between the invention of the printing press, and the wars in Europe that
 followed for the next several centuries.
 The printing press spread a kind of craziness, as it were.
 The process is subtle, I suppose: mass readership allowed mass understading
 of certain different (religious) world-views that were at tension with
 one-another.
 The tensions were resolved by war; the war was possible, on a mass scale,
 only because mass-scale armies with a unified, coherent ideology was possible,
 and this was possible, only due to dissemination of printed materials.
 Because it was low-cost.
 Printing both unified, and divided.
 I've blogged, at length, about the change of network topology enabled by
 social media.
 I won't rehash here.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The point is that this never felt personal before.
 I've always found a thing to do, and a reason to do it.
 Yet, I was sleepwalking through life: the underlying reason, it was never
 (or rarely?) questioned.
 I just went on automatic.
 Last few months, I've realized that the sleep-walking is not a metaphorical
 expression, but is, in a way, literal.
 Like a lucid dream, stuff happens, I do stuff.
 I have desires and wants, in lucid dreams and waking life.
 But in the lucid dream, I've never stopped to ask 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

why do I have this desire?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 In waking life, I've almost never stopped to ask this question.
 I've proceeded forwards.
 There was a path ahead, and I followed it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Now I'm stopping.
 I've gotten to the point where I have to ask 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

what is the meaing of life?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and have some weak desire to explore this question.
 I have many other weak desires.
 I am also over-powered by social media.
 It is too easy to spend 12 hours on twitter, doom-scrolling.
 I'd done it before, on facebook, before my account there was dematerialized
 by facebook.
 I'd done it on youtube, a little bit, but less seriously.
 I'm taking in lots and lots of medium-low quality information.
 A mass survey of the noosphere.
 On youtube, I collected videos on a century of industrialization.
 Then some on geopolitics.
 Read several Timothy Snyder books.
 Watched his entire History of Ukraine video series.
 I loved it! Will some future super-intellegence have access to my history
 of twitter comments? Facebook posts? Has facebook erased all data associated
 with me? Has it been removed from the timeline of the universe? I am obsessed
 with leaving evidence of my existance, behind me.
 I've also been documenting my family, via geneology, on the Church of the
 LDS geneology website.
 I have a desire, a weak desire to do this.
 I have a weak desire to write more on quantum (I have a backlog of about
 30-50 pages of material that I should write down before I forget it.) I
 should forcus on earning income.
 I have a to-do list of things to do.
 Paint the house, weed the garden.
 Pay the bills.
 Read a long list of papers in AI and ML and quantum and pure math.
 Exercise and watch my health, and continuing to develop a nutraceutical
 plan for longevity.
 And yet...
 this to-do-list is overwhelming.
 Thus, the crisis of meaning.
 What does it all mean? what is it all about?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph*
One hour later...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Got up to go to the bathroom.
 Thoughts raed ahead, lost the train of thought.
 How do I describe the speeding train.
 Had an hour-long conversation with Jules.
 So whatever verbal desires I had got spent on that interaction.
 So here I am, recouping.
 What should I write? Maybe I should go outside and weed the garden instead.
 Then I'll come back, hot and sweaty, and lose the urge to write.
 Let me try that.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But first...
 see, that's the problem.
 But first...
 there's always a but first.
 But first, I'll set into words the thought I had while walking in Chiacgo
 (I'm in Ausin now, for the last three+ weeks.) I was thinking about how
 its like to be a jelly-fish.
 Hallucinating through life, drifting in water.
 Surely jellyfish cannot tell the difference between dream-life and waking
 life? But all brains sleep, I've been told.
 Maybe even jellyfish sleep? Still...
 what is the difference between the waking dream and the dream-dream, for
 jellyfish? The difference is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

more obvious
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 for humans, and yet I concluded that everyone sleep-walks through life.
 Everyone is on autopilot, reacting to the world around them, vaguely cognizant
 of thier abilities and presence.
 Rarely or never seizing the day.
 Sleepwalking.
 Well.
 whith effort, I could maybe develop that argument some more.
 More about the effort of developing arguments, later.
 I'm going to go weed, now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph*
Twenty minutes later...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Twenty minutes is enough.
 One can do a lot.
 Without getting exhausted.
 It is Texas, afer all.
 It is sunny.
 And hot.
 And weeds cut one's bare arms, so now my arms itch.
 Yuck.
 Maybe I should wash them.
 ..
 There.
 Washed.
 Better-ish.
 Now my shins itch.
 No, I am not autistic.
 Feeling your shins itch does not make you autistic.
 Sheesh.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I have lots of feels, Qualia is the technical term.
 I enjoy yoga and stretching because of how it makes mu muscles and tendons
 feel.
 So do many other people.
 I mean, jeez, I did not invent yoga.
 I'm pretty sure most or all yoga books talk about qualia, maybe not that
 term, but they talk about it.
 On line, people talk about jhanas.
 Cause I guess that's the enlightened state, whe you feel no ugly desires,
 like coveting thy neighbors sports-car.
 I wonder if people with sports cars talk about jhanas or not.
 Or if its just social status signalling.
 I suppose that there is someone in Silicon Valley who uses jhanas to social-sig
nal thier position in the SV social hierarchy.
 So it goes, so it goes.
 My dog wants to go on a walk.
 Back later.
 Maybe.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Wait.
 First I'll finish drinking my coffee.
 Optimization.
 It's much too late - 6PM.
 I should not be drinking coffee, but I'm a speed freak.
 I like it.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Where was I? Jhanas, qualia, desires, social pecking order, jellyfish, sleepwalk
ing ...
 the crisis of being.
 The stages of enlightenment.
 These are personal.
 There's the hierachy of genetic and neurochemical stuff that makes social
 media addicting (or anything else addicting).
 Therre's the hierarchy that causes humans to organize into society and
 tructure, to create corporations that are bigger than us.
 Centuries-long cultural artifacts, e.g.
 the Medieval rule of law, or the University.
 The topological change of social media.
 The crisis of meaning.
 The crisis of sensmaking, of weeding our way through an information space
 polluted by propaganda and just sheer craziness.
 And, most recently, my own personal crisis: what should I do now? Right
 now? I mean, besides walk the dog? What should I do tonite? what if I don't
 have the energy? should I force myself? Should I sink into my velvet rut?
 I did not invent the phrase 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

velvet rut
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 or the phrase 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

doom-scrolling
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 These are commonplace experiences.
 Yet I am ill-equipped to deal with them.
 Apparently, almost everyone who experiences these are ill-equipped to deal
 with them.
 And no one quite knows the answer.
 We seek the answer.
 Firesign Theatre used to say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

there's a seeker born every minute
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 I should listen to Firesign Theatre again.
 To see how it matches up with my memories.
 Of course, GPT should have the Firesign Theatre scripts memorized, I suppose.
 Ah, and that is perhaps a contributing factor to my personal crisis: what,
 exactly, how to respond to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the Singularity
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

? It seemed obvious, how, way back when.
 Just surf it, like a wave.
 I rationally expected turbulence, but I did not emotionally feel the reality
 of what I rationally understood.
 Now I am starting to feel it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm not the first to think of this, I just listend to Vlad Vexler on youtube
 talking about russians, and he tried to explain the difference between
 rational ideation (
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

I beleive in equal rights between men and women
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

) and action (
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

non-the-less, I always vote for men, only.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

) He was using this to explain russian imperialist attitudes, something
 about wide-open spaces, russia without borders.
 russia, lower case, because they deserve shit for Ukraine.
 Vlad attributed this distinction to some other author, and he flashed a
 book cover in the video.
 So my talking about this now means there is nothing new under the sun.
 I rationally knew the Singularity was coming.
 I was not expecting a nervous breakdown to accompany it.
 Well, OK, look, I hope it is clear that I am writing cohrerently enough
 that calling this a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

nervous breakdown
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is perhaps much much too strong a term for it.
 People understand this phrase to mean something much more concrete and
 serious.
 Well, its serous for me, but ...
 what should I call it? A 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

high-function nervous breakdown
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

? I still need to walk the dog.
 And finish drinking my coffee first.
 I still have a sense of self.
 I'm just struggling to figure out whether I should spend any time writing
 abot quantum mechanics, because (1) it will be half-baked, because I don't
 have time to put in more time, and at age 63 I sense a decline in my mental
 abilities!? (or am I only imaginging this? Not sure.
 Objectively, this should be the case.
 But maybe I'm a late bloomer.
 Problem (2) nobody will read it.
 It will have just about no impact on the universe, whatsoever.
 Why should I do anything that has no impact on the universe? It's a kind
 of mental masturbation.
 There's a sly doub le-meaning in there: the universe thinking about itself
 is a sly mental msturbation of the universe itself.
 Hah Hah.
 What a fucking conundrum.
 Should I or should I not? What's the point? Whats the meaing of it all?
 Should I bother, or should I not? I mean, I could write, or I could do
 grounded, based stuff, like weed the garden, walk the dog and pay the bills
 on time.
 Ordinary fucking shit to keep things balanced, and well, is it sleepwalking?
 Or is it a tiny quivering of qualia in normalicy? Is there wonder, or is
 there not? What the fuck is it all about? Problem (3) priorities.
 Limited lifetime, one must balance priorities.
 But how can I even know what is more important? Is impact on the universe
 more important? If I truly wanted to impact the universe in a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

strong
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 way, perhaps I should join a political cause, and push on that.
 Maybe.
 Or maybe that is premature; I should have my crisis here and now, get it
 over with, out of the way, before diving into the next thing.
 Wrap up my current project: the crisis, before tackling my next project.
 I mean, starting a new project while in the middle of a crisis might just
 cause it to fail.
 Or it could save my life!? I mean, if the crisis was that I was in a sinking
 submarine, my life in danger, then what the heck, starting a new project
 involving escape is like a really great ide, because that would allow me
 to live (i.e.
 by escaping the crisis of the sinking submarine).
 So is my current nervous breakdown, is it similar to a sinking submarine?
 Doom-scrolling and being caught in a velvet rut, how much of that is impending
 doom? I'm not a doomer.
 I don't feel like there's doom ahead.
 I rationally understand that there could be, but I don't feel it yet.
 Personality and genetics.
 My mind races.
 What should I do next? I don't know about you, but I'm going to walk the
 dog, now.
 I will do very little formal cncious, directed thinking as I do it.
 I will mostly exercise my arms and legs.
 Till later.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph*
Ninty minutes later...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The meta-issue is, of course, that thinking takes focus and concentration
 and energy, aka 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

real work
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and it is much easier to defocus and paddle downstream.
 An additional layer on top of that is converting ideation into written
 language.
 Something coherent that you have some hope of following.
 We are not James Joyce, we are not writing Ulysses, here.
 We are not writing for humans.
 Joyce had no idea that GPT lay in the future.
 He was an Author.
 A writer.
 A tortured soul of some kind seeking not just toe express but to make a
 living out of it, to get paid.
 To get by in life doing what seemed like something that could be done,
 something that he could do.
 Paint pictures, with words.
 I suppose I am painting pictures too, but in this case, I am trying tto
 illuminate he inner workings of my own mind.
 Not for profit, but for posterity.
 I guess posterity is a kind of profit.
 If I live longer, in any form, I profit.
 Careful with the word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

profit
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Anyway, writing is sufficiently dettached from the inner state that writing
 can only paint a picture of the inner mind, instead of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

being it
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 I don't think in words, I think abstractly.
 I suffer and disappoint, in the conversion of thoughts to words.
 I guess this is obvious, surely many authors have remarked and made not
 of that.
 However, I spend enough time with obtuse people that I often have to state
 the obvious.
 And os that's like a weird situation.
 I have to state the obvious, but if I don't, people assume I'm dumb.
 The word 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

dumb
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 has two meanings: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

stupid
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

lacking speech
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 I'm not stupid (compared to most people) nor do I lack is speech (I can
 be gregarious, when I want to be) but sometimes, stating the obvious bores
 me.
 But perhaps this was not obvious to you, dear reader, so I state it now.
 What a fucking mess.
 What a hell-hole.
 Cannot make forward progress, due to the drag, the friction of having to
 explain more basic things to an audience.
 AKA 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

communication
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Let me tell you a story (I tell this to people, time to time.) I had a friend,
 certifiably crazy.
 Mental.
 Had to be hospitalized crazy.
 He told a joke, it was a complete non-sequiter.
 Cause, you know, he was crazy.
 Half a year later, after he was let out of the mental hospital, at a dinner
 party, he explained the joke.
 It had five or six additional stages, and, when these were spelled out,
 the joke was actually funny.
 You could laugh.
 But he had never verbalized that.
 Just the first line, and the punch line, the rest unrolled silently in
 his head.
 Such went the life of a crazy person.
 Perhaps he was sane all along, but ...
 just unable to express.
 Oh, wait.
 Well, OK, so well.
 umm, it was more subtle than that.
 When he was in the hospital, the MD gave him an integral to do.
 Calculus.
 A kind-of-ish hard integral.
 He kept converting it to one form (change of variable) and back.
 Just bouncing between these two expressions, unable to solve it.
 So this was, indeed, evidence of him being unable to control his own thought
 process sufficiently to break out of that trap, that loop.
 Well, it *was* a hard integral.
 We were in grad school.
 He was a grad student in mathematics.
 I remember looking at the integral, and thinking that the answer was not
 obvious.
 I mean, I couldn't solve it in my head, but I wasn't there to do that.
 So.
 Lucidity requires not just a string of thoughts, not just a salad of ideas,
 but a specific structure.
 And this structure must be understandable to ...
 well...
 other humans, and to yourself.
 The part about explaining the obvious to others is boring but a necessary
 part of communications.
 The part of explaining it to yourself is a necessary part of coherent developme
nt of an idea for oneself.
 (Wow, this actually ties into some quantum ideas I've had, but that's like
 a fifty-page digression.
 Later, in a different format and venue.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Where was I? Structured thought.
 Well, I know this rationally.
 Here's the trick.
 I can do structured thought wil lounging in a chair.
 Walking in the park.
 Lying in bed.
 But then, if I am not careful, it evaporates.
 Perhaps it returns days later, perhaps it does not.
 How developed is it? Not much, if I don't think about it.
 Not much, if I feel no compelling reason to put it into words – either
 as some witty remark at a party, to some freinds, or as some written tract
 I publish as a PDF or web page or blog or some source code.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Source code is perhaps an interesting case of development, particularly
 easy to grasp.
 I often have the vaguest feelig or inspiration for how something might
 be done.
 I can day-dream it, and then forget it.
 I can open an issue in github, and set it into words, developing it a bit
 more in the process.
 And/or I can write the code for it.
 Writing the code, debugging it, and making it actually work correctly,
 well, wow, that changes everything.
 It materializes surprising aspects that were never there in the original
 thought.
 The original though was a vector: a direction: the start of an electrical
 charge, lighting bolt, but the path to ground not yet formed.
 The actual path to ground lies in the future, still unknown, and it takes
 some surprising turns when it does form.
 And even the feelers, exporing possible routes, even these are surprising,
 these were not there in the original thought.
 The original thought was just a potential.
 Just a voltage, at the edge of atmosphere breakdown, but not yet an active
 process.
 That is what thinking is like.
 The debugged source code is the actual discharge.
 The github issue describing the idea is just a set of feelers.
 And the vague thought, possibly forgotten, is just a ...
 vague thought.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And so, there we are.
 That's thinking.
 I'm writing here.
 I know not why, but it seems criminal if I don't write.
 Something will be lost.
 I do not know whhere I am going.
 It is a journey.
 Well, I do have other explicit journeys I have in mind, specifically the
 development of social onctacts in Vilnius, but that is for another day.
 Not going to writ about that now.
 Right now, the topic needs to continue to be the crisis.
 Although I am not feeling the pressure of that crisis just right now, it
 feels alleviated.
 Perhaps the walk in the park, the mild hunger has taken the edge off.
 It will return, as I fall asleep, as I wake in the morning.
 But I cannot type as I sleep, and the assorted brain reading machines that
 could maybe extract some of my thinking, maybe, these don't exist.
 There are rumours of interesting developments, but you have to stick your
 head in a multi-million dollar machine, first.
 Thought-reading machines are not yet household items.
 And fuck.
 If and when they are, then ...
 I dunno.
 The feeling of crisis will surely elevate a few more notches.
 I mean, all this talk of post-human cy borg and whatnot is envigorating
 sci-fi, until the day it becomes real, in which case, the shit will suddenly
 become very real, as they say.
 The rational understanding will become an emotional response.
 A crisis, I suppose.
 A nervous breakdown, even.
 I don't see how it could be any other way.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And now I'm going to take a break to get some food, and return to the topic
 – the meaing of life.
 What is the universe doing? How do I navigate from here to there? Will
 I live long enough to confront the post-human crisis? Do I have five or
 ten or twenty years? Will I be able to afford it? will the medical technology
 be there? Will Western Civ loose its shit, and descend into kinetic chaos,
 with bullets flying, and I die, victim of some unforseen alt-right mass
 shooting? Victim of some black-on-white crime in Chicago? Will I make it,
 or will I die of a heart-attack in Vilnius? OK, let me get some food.
 Back in a moment.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I wandered into the kitchen, and decided I'm not hungry.
 Not yet ready to eat.
 My stomach is not prepared.
 So I have a big glass of highly diluted orange juice in front of me.
 I like it highly-diluted.
 Maybe six to one.
 Flavor without heft.
 I am expressing a prefreence...
 why? for posterity? So you can get to know me? I can hand wave and note
 that there are plenty of huamns who are gastronomes, intensiely interested
 in food.
 Earlier today, I gave my sone Jules a talk about all thye things one can
 do as a human.
 He started the conversation by saying he thinks he's mildly autistic.
 He's not.
 He thinks he is, because he's had some large number of awkward converations
 in high-school.
 I assured him that awkward is a hallmark of highschool.
 I think maybe he actually understood and beleived me.
 Although I had to talk about qualia and the pursuit of qualia.
 Pursuit of smell, of touch, of color and shape.
 Pursuit of the more abstract, including social cues and language skills.
 Whatever, I could recap that conversation cause it's fresh in my head,
 but you are not my son, and I don't have anything that I need to teach
 you.
 Well, I do have something, but its..
 well I am teaching myself, in a way.
 Or perhaps experimenting with automatic writing.
 I'm not sure.
 Joyce did automatic writing.
 So do manny college (and high-school!) students, enourage by their teachers
 to explore themselves, to explore thier ability to express.
 Well, I know how to express, that is not the problem.
 I am struggling with what to do next.
 So, like writers block.
 Except its take-action-block.
 Clearly I'm writing, so that's not blocked.
 But the ocean of things I can do next, it seems so boundless, I don't know
 what to choose.
 And everything that is important, it would take many years, longer, of
 sustained effort to develop.
 So what should I pick, that is worthy of five or ten years of sustained
 effort? I don't know.
 How can I plan the next two decades? How does this work? That is why I'm
 writing.
 To decide what to do next, both at the minute-by-minute level, and at the
 day-to-day level, and the year-to-year level.
 And the need for sustained effort is intimidating, And the sinking back
 into the velvet rut, doom-scrolling through social media is so easy.
 Opium for the masses, dulling the senses, even as it pumps your brain full
 of ideas.
 So, OK, in that sense, social media is much much better for you than opium.
 What is alarming is how ...
 addictive it is.
 Harumpf.
 And so here I am again, going in a circle, again.
 Doing that change-of-variable on that integral, and back, again.
 Now what? What do I do next? Fuck.
 Fuck you.
 Fuck me.
 Fuck Fuck Fuck.
 Where was I? Right.
 The universe.
 Lets think about that for a while.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The universe.
 So here I am, in a certain sense, I am the universe, thinking about itself,
 etc.
 a common trope.
 My bounds of thinking do not extend beyond my experience, my body, my education
, the rutted channels oof my thoughts.
 But I try to hop the channel.
 To break out.
 Do I have free will? I started an essay about that.
 It has something to do with quantum mechanics.
 I will develop that lter.
 Not tonight.
 Maybe tomorrow.
 I don't know.
 Again, is this mental masturbation? Why bother? I've evaded the crisis,
 or the crisis has evaporated, but I am now focusing hard, trying to pull
 it back into reality.
 I want to focus on the nervous breakdown, will it into being.
 Make it happen.
 Get it done.
 Avoid the sleepwalking, avoid teh velvet rut, avoid the opium addiction,
 avoid the banal day to day existance, and force the situation into a crisis.
 Neurons of the brain, unite! You have nothing to lose but your chains!
 Easy to say, hard to do.
 Fuck.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Try again...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hehe.
 Oh why fuck.
 Lookit here.
 This guy David Orban sends me junk mail, and you know what today's junk
 mail is? Let me quote: 
\begin_inset Box Boxed
position "t"
hor_pos "c"
has_inner_box 1
inner_pos "t"
use_parbox 0
use_makebox 0
width "100col%"
special "none"
height "1in"
height_special "totalheight"
thickness "0.4pt"
separation "3pt"
shadowsize "4pt"
framecolor "black"
backgroundcolor "none"
status open

\begin_layout Quotation

David Orban
\end_layout

\begin_layout Quotation

What is the question that I should be asking? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Quotation

2023 week 18 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Quotation

\end_layout

\begin_layout Quotation

Don't be a Zombie, be a Luminary
\end_layout

\begin_layout Quotation

The sudden availability of advanced Artificial Intelligence platforms forces
 us to confront not only the evaluation of our own abilities but, even deeper,
 what it means to be a conscious, self-aware human being.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Quotation

\end_layout

\begin_layout Quotation

We can explore this from both scientific and philosophical points of view,
 ultimately drawing practical conclusions.
 My conclusion and exhortation is simple: Don't be a zombie, be a luminary.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And then there is this link to a youtube video.
 Haven't clicked on it yet.
 How funny.
 This is exactly the topic of this long rambling mess of an essay.
 I am not alone.
 Some subsegent of humans are experiencing this same nervous breakdown that
 I am.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh wait.
 There's more.
 Let me read what he wrote.
 Be back in a moment.
 (See, communication can happen.
 I am not just writing to you, I am reading from others.
 Lets see if its any good.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK, so Orban is able to write conventional prose, in the style acceptable
 to liberal media and the educated.
 Well-formed sentences that flow and hit all the right points, contrained
 into normalicy and conventional composition.
 No fireworks, nothing wonky, nothing suspect.
 No mental instability, no craziness, just informative prose.
 And he ..
 spells out the obvious.
 Recapitulating centuries if not millenia of modern liberal thought, from
 Ancient Greece, and a tinge of Hindu enlightenment, to say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Be! ...
 Be all that you can be! Join the ...
 Army?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 No, join the legion of the enlightened, the luminaries, those who are fully
 self-aware and have grapsed the meaning of it all, those who can sense
 and express and be and live, unlike those pesky philosophical zombies who...
 join the Army? (FWIW, yes, I know, zombie-like obedience to authority is
 an explicitly developed trait in soldiers.
 If you are going to kill people, you can't be a wuss, and have self-doubts.
 You have to follow orders, or people will die.
 Soldiers are trained to be zombies, in a certain sense.
 Not dehumanized, no, but effective in stressful conditions, reacting automatica
lly in life-threatening situations.
 Have I mentioned that I spend hours a day tracking events in Ukraine? Yes?
 Well, let me mention it again.
 I have been, since the day the war broke out.
 What a wild ride.
 Fascinating) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
See, that's the problem.
 I find the events in Ukraine fascinating.
 I've learned a bit of Eastern European history, thanks to Timothy Snyder.
 I've learned about logicstic, thanks to Trento Telenko.
 Not that Trent is the highest luminary on twitter, rather, his name is
 stuck in my mind, because he recently expressed some rather ugly opinion.
 But his basic tutorials on logistics have been excellent.
 I am basic, afer all.
 We all were.
 None of us had a clue.
 And so that is more interesting than what David Orban had to say, because
 Orban wrote about the obvious.
 Why did he do that? Well, he writes a newsletter, and the point of newsletters
 is to state the obvious to the readership.
 Much Like Telenko, except that I already know a thing or two about enlightenmen
t, whereas I know very little about logistics.
 What a fucking trip.
 Why amd I wasting time writing this? Oh yeah, to reveal unto you my inner
 thoughts.
 To create my self-protrait.
 Because that is what this text is – an attempted self-portrait of the burning
 inner workings of my mind.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It is work, however.
 I clicked through, and there are half-a-dozen youtbue videos that suddenly
 seem appealing and rewarding to watch.
 And what should I do? Watch them, and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

kill some time
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, so I can wonder, decades hence, where all the time went? I will learn
 something by watching them.
 It will be more immediately pleasureable than continuing to sit here any
 type.
 This typing is work, its mentally taxing, it takes effort.
 Maybe less effort than social interactions, where I would have to adjust
 my drivel to the particular social setting.
 Here I can drivel away.
 My mind is on vacation while my mouth is working overtime.
 Put brain in gear before engaging mouth.
 I can do that, you know.
 I can write drivel.
 Perhaps I am writing it now.
 I'm not exactly taking a lot of time to reflect before typing.
 It's just coming out.
 Logorrhea.
 To convert the logorrhea into meaningful thoughts, I would have to stop
 and formulate ideas, and then sop and reflect on the finest choice of words
 to express those ideas.
 Fuck that.
 Lets just write! I read somewhere that thinking hard depletes one's brain
 of some certain neurotransmitter, and it makes one tired.
 I forget the name of it, right now.
 It is the same one that modulated by sports supplements, and is involved
 in athletic performance.
 This is why, apparently, college athlets can set world records in the summer,
 but never-ever during final exams.
 The mental exhaustion of studying for class exhausts the same neurotansmitter
 that you need to focus to perform at your best, athletically.
 I row.
 Did you know that? Of cours you did.
 I have maybe half a dozen gold medals in US National Masters Rowing Championshi
ps.
 I have walked the straight and narrow of being an athlete.
 in some certain sense, rowing is the most difficult thing I have ever done
 in life.
 It is more difficult than phsyics or abstract math or studying for final
 exams.
 It requires a certain level of sheer will-power and focus and mental stamina
 and delicate finesse.
 Grace.
 A level of grace that I have never needed to harness to understand some
 blob of math.
 I mean, I'm great at focusing and applying intellectual effort to solve
 problems and acheive ends.
 But it does not hurt, it does not phsyically hurt, the way that rowing
 does.
 The sheer willpower needed to row and win a race is more concentrated than
 anything else I've done.
 The good news is that its over in 4 minutes, for sprints, and 20 minutes,
 for head-races.
 So there it is.
 This apparently requires some neurotransmitter that is depeleted, both
 by athletic activity, and by hard thinking.
 Well, I'm not really thiking hard here (remember, this is a sample of my
 logorrhea) but well, it is not entirely effortless.
 It's a brisk walk in the park? Is that what this writing is like? A brisk
 walk? It's not max effort.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Why? because I'm evading the crisis.
 I'm evading the nervous breakdown.
 I'm too tired to bring it into the forefront.
 If I did, I fear that I will rehash the same od steps, go in that circle,
 do that change of variable over and over, to come back where I started
 with no forward progress.
 Only exhausted a bit more than when I started.
 Is this good? I don't know.
 In row, we practive, to get better and stronger.
 Is that what i'm doing here? Practicing? Long steady-state? Should I stopwritin
g, and watch youtube instead? Should I write some more, and perhaps luckily
 pick up the theme, again? Am I boring you? I'm kind of boring me.
 But I'm afraid to stop.
 If I stop writing now, I may put this down till tomorrow, till next week,
 till ...
 never.
 For fuck sake, this could be the last diary entry ever.
 Was it worth it? Too late! Its in the past.
 You can't change the past, you can't remember the future.
 You can forget the past.
 You can erase overt digital knowledge.
 Is there some quatum trace of it left, wandering the universe, after I
 hit delete on my computer? What about when I die? Is there some quantum
 imprint of my life, circulating in the universe, after I die? Well, on
 the one hand, of course there is: the memories of my childrens, the memories
 of everyone I have ever known.
 Of course.
 George Bailey left his mark.
 But a mark is not the same as some detailed, fine-grained imprint.
 If I wipe a disk drive today, can someone a thousand years from now reconstruct
 the contents of that disk drive, out of the quantum traces it left behind?
 I doubt it, but it is a question worth pondering for that quantum paper
 that I might not get around to writing.
 OK, so writing this last paragraph was a little more satisfying.
 Can I do it again?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hmmm.
 Or I can call it a night.
 It is 9:30 PM, 21:30 military time, Sunday May 7, 2023.
 Intuition says I will not be able to recapture the crisis, and write about
 it tonight.
 Best to call it quits.
 Try again tomorrow.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Do we get tired because ...
 nature never needed to optimize us for not getting mentally exhausted?
 Why does everything with a brain need to sleep? Is it simple mechanical
 cellular repair? Or is it a time to commune with the deep quantum thermodynamic
 state, and be one with the universe? All is one? Omni padme hum? Yes, I
 sometimes give such thoughts a platform.
 But god forbid, it would have to be quite the social setting for me to
 chatter about this to other humans.
 Welll ...
 and why? Well, because I don't know anyone who would actually be interested
 in such musings.
 Well, only maybe 3-4-5 people I know.
 Maybe six people I know.
 But then it would be stating the obvious, with nothing to add.
 Because they too might suspect as much, and its not like I have a fully
 developed quantum theory that sleeping and dreaming is communing with the
 universe, all-is-one state.
 The other problem is that people who get sucked into this kind of woo shit
 tend to be morons.
 With whome I cannot communicate with.
 I mean, I have a PhD in theoretical particle physics.
 I understand this stuff, dammit.
 And when I talk to someome who does not have a PhD in theoretical particle
 physics, it is a case of abandon all hope ye who enter here.
 I cannot teach it to them, and if they are willing to beleive in fucked
 up quantum shit in the same way that they believe in chemtrails or bill
 gates implanting chips in your brain when you take a cover test ..
 well, fuck that.
 The human brain is plastic.
 But that means the human brain can fall out of it's skull.
 And this is part of the modern crisis.
 The human brain can be shaped into beleiving preposterous shit, and there
 is nothing we can do about it.
 I mean, its OK that the human mind is plastic.
 What is not OK is the mass hysteria, the group psychosis.
 The 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

harmless
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 group psychosis for flat-earth or moon-landing denialism, or the overtly
 hostile and deleteriou s group psychosis peddled by Fox News.
 Liek, whatt was the one I say today? Everyone should be kind and polite,
 because the other guy might be having a bad day, and they might be packing
 heat, and might be ready to go on a shooting rampage.
 So you should be kind and polite, and be prepared to kill everyone you
 meet.
 Like WTF.
 Is that mass psychosis or what? But the twitter #2A crowd (that's 2nd amendment
) actually beleive this shit.
 Or maybe wht 1420 interviews on youtube of Moscow citizens, and some of
 the bone-chilling opinions they express.
 Makes you think: are these russians even human? How can you possible say
 something so lacking in compassion, so freaking genocidal, overtly so?
 Because, what, you are parroting Olga fucking Skabayeva? How do people
 get so fucked up? That's a semi-rhetorical question.
 Although I guess I would be interested in a more detailed answer.
 Except I do not beleive that psychiatric, psychological science, neuroscience
 has advanced to the point where we can give a good answer as to why people
 beleive in fucked up shit.
 I mean we can, there are books on this stuff.
 I'm vaguely aware of the general drift of things.
 Vaguely.
 But.
 Hmm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Where was I? I'm going around in circles.
 I've mentioned Soloviev and Margarits Simopnyan, before, up above, I think.
 Maybe.
 Maybe Julia Davis, who translates them into English.
 Im going round in circles, wringing my hands about the dire state of affairs.
 And so what? So fucking what? Where do I go from here? What do I do next?
 I mean, this is important.
 The Singularity is neigh, we grasp at the straws of a post-capitalist world
 order, trying to avoid destruction, to acheive civilizational enlightenment,
 but how to the details go? Are we forever in trench warfare, dealing with
 whatever hits us in the next few minutes/hours/days/years, or can we strategize
 our way to civilizational enlightenment? Am I a sucker for a utopian dream?
 Of course not.
 We all know the common wisdom about utopian dreams.
 Yet we have gobs of evidence that both mammals and birds have an innate
 biological sense of fairness and justice: the utopian dream is hard-coded
 in their genetics too, and not just in the genes of primates.
 Dogs know when you mistreat them.
 Oh, and a non-sequiter detour: dogs are not philosophical zombies.
 Whatever.
 So conern for civilizational enlightenment is a valid dream.
 Utopian, of course, but valid.
 When civilizational enlightenment is reached, when we obtain nirvana, then
 perhaps that nivana will be wrapped in crisis and nervous breakdown.
 Nobody ever claimed that utopia and nirvana is NOT a crisis! Wooooof.
 So there.
 We've got that, too.
 Take a load off grandma, take a load for free, take a load off grandma,
 and put the load right on, right on me.
 Great song.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Now for real.
 I'm done for the night.
 It is now exactly 22:00, exactly 30 minutes since before.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
8 May 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Why am I writing this? Song lyrics are far more extreme, explore a far greater
 territory than I ever could.
 Also ...
 novels (I read relatively few novels ...) I imagine there are others out there
 who are also writing weird diaries intended for machine learners.
 I have incoherent, mixed feelings about this project.
 Well, shit.
 The inner voice.
 Should I or shouldn't I? Valid arguments in both directions.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The strongest argument might be that I am biologically-driven.
 Biological creatures have explosive (exponential) growth, until rate-limiting
 factors settle in and slow it (trees never stop growing, but flowers do.)
 As mentioned above, animals seem to have a sense of justice and decency,
 not just mammals, but animals in general.
 So there is some deep underpinning.
 Not clear how this goes from genetics to neurons to behavior: that bridge
 is scientifically unknown.
 The desire to explore and express, self-express, is human.
 My urge to write here is not a sin (even though it sometimes feels like
 that).
 I mean, wtf, all artistic expression is an outpouring, even if this particular
 self-expression is not intended to entertain others, but to ...
 find myself.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, I hope that perhaps that will be the last outburst.
 Frankly, it is easier not to write, than to write.
 And the need to create words does interfer with the process that generates
 ideas.
 I can create both words and ideas at the same time, but not very efficiently.
 Creating ideas alone, and then memorizing the general drift and then wrapping
 words around the retained feeling of the idea, that iis easier.
 Ideation is inhibited by language generation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hmm.
 Again, I am not the first to observe the above.
 And, from what I have heard, there are people who do not ideate at all,
 without ideating purely in words.
 The so-called wordcels vs.
 the shape-rotators.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Also touched upon here is the thread of originality vs.
 the mundane.
 The cultural expectation that I have been raised on is that originality
 is vital, fundamental, important.
 Certainly, in academic literature, the stuff to be published must be original.
 Yet, the vastness of libraries, and even more so, the vastness of the internet
 shows that true originality is almost always absent.
 Well, hang on.
 Let me pull that apart into two distinct threads.
 One: I have created original work in physics and math.
 So, in that sense, originality is possible.
 Two: my confused thoughts, set to writing here, are not original.
 I beleive that everyone has confused thoughts.
 Heck - clearly seen in PTSD and mental illness: thought confusion is starkly
 visible.
 Next, there are tens of thousands physics, math, software types, sharing
 a common background and temperment to my own, some of whom have strayed
 into the tterritory I'm in now.
 Of these, I beleive that there are at least a dozen, if not a hundred,
 who are writing a diary such as this, with similar purpose, maybe with
 similar style.
 So here, specifically, I argue I am not 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

original
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 But this is a misnomer, I am 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

original
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, just that I am not 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

unique
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 All humans are original: they do things they've never done before.
 However, what they do is commonplace, and thus considered unremarkable.
 Going to the toilet is not something to write home about, even if each
 time is not quite like the time before.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If I think about this, perhaps I can give this mathematical clothing, and
 use some symbols to indicate a proability distribution of conventional
 behaviors, and then talk about the occasional forays into the unusual.
 For example, climbing Mount Everest.
 Perhaps more commonplace now, but there were the first few times, when
 this was truly a new and never-done-before thing.
 I am not climbing Mount Everest here.
 I'm not even training.
 Its more like logorrhea - a very deprecating term, belittling my actions,
 suggesting I should stop writing.
 The urge to stop writing is over-ridden by some other ...
 drive.
 Fuck I'm confused.
 I felt it, now the feeling is gone.
 There was a momentary glimpse through the clouds of that part of my brain
 that motivates me to write, distinct from the part that does the writing.
 The clouds parted, and now they closed again.
 I sit and wait for another insight.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And this is the problem of mundanity.
 The waiting for an insight.
 And the frustration is that almost all insights I am able to get here,
 the feels, these have all been glimpsed and sketched and developed by writers,
 by singers, by poets that have come before me so wtf why am I wasting electrons
 pointing out the well-known? Well, I gave a defense of the well-known yesterday.
 But its a new situation here: here, I am talking about things well-known
 to common human experience, vs.
 things that are must be explained in detail, if someone is to understand
 the specific communicated message.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
OK, some more math, then.
 My thoughts here are ergodic, a space-fillig curve attempting to visit
 all points of the noosphere.
 Publishable creativity consists of editing out all the places that have
 been visited by others, and holding forth the novel, the preciosly unexplored.
 But the general ergodicity is unavoidable: at some point or another, thoughts
 return to conventional space.
 The mathematics of transformers, as I currently but incompletely understand
 them, are just geometry in a high-dimensional space.
 My ergodic travels are not all that different from the ergodic travels
 of GPT.
 From what I can tell, GPT is just taking a random walk through nearest-neighbor
 points located at the corners of a high-dimensional cub projected on a
 high-dimensional sphere.
 In N dimensions, a cube has 2^N corners, and so those points are extremely
 close to each-other, in the metric sense.
 The transformer is an affine transformation between spaces, but the general
 idea remains.
 GPT differs from my own thoughts in that, well, my thoughts have a yoke,
 a harness, that guides rational expression differently.
 I have extra parts that suppress hallucination.
 Mostly.
 Yadda yadda.
 Obivously, mild hallucination is vital and central for artistic creativity.
 Big hallicinations gives us phenomena like the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Hi Ren
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 song.
 I digress.
 Well, with some engineering effort, someone will eventually slap a hallucinatio
n-suppressor onto GPT.
 At which point, the problem of the philosophical zombie becomes a bit more
 difficult.
 But even then, even after this is done, there are still differences between
 me and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

it
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

: I still have the biological, animal, mammalian, primate senses of fairness
 and justice, but also of love, loss, confusion, will, strength, determination,
 passion, empathy – the so-called 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

positive traits
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that appear to be deeply and innately biological.
 All this is apparently absent from GPT.
 And is there anyone, besides me, who is even thinking about this? I suppose
 maybe there is.
 But how are we to attach, to connect this to an LLM? It imbue these qualities?
 Or, hey: more basically: emotions: sadness, happiness, anger, love, infatuation
, obsession.
 Fuck.
 I'm not even giving a proper taxonomy here: some of these come and got
 at the one-minute timescale, some persist for hours, weeks, months, years.
 Temerpment is like climate, as compared to weather, which changes day to
 day.
 I am not trying to catalogue and give a scientific development of affects
 and emotions.
 Rather, I am invoking these as a subsystem, shared by animals (dogs certainly
 get angry.
 Fight or flight is textbook stuff.) but however well developed these are
 for animals, we have no matching AI or AGI conception for this.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Sigh.
 Insead of prattling on about this, I should be reading technical papers
 and trying to figure this out.
 Research.
 But wait, why? I want to hasten the arrival of AGI? Well, yes, I guess
 I do.
 It carries the risk of being civilization-destroying, it carries the hope
 of solving my problems with aging: I would like to be young again, and
 have lots of sex.
 That sounds like something I would enjoy.
 Being smart, I would ask the genie for another wish: to be smarter.
 And thus, with a single step, begins the journey of a thousand miles, culminati
ng with my future as a jupiter-brain.
 The post-human apocalypse.
 Is this what I want? Well, again, there is a conventional answer for that,
 found in the sci-fi literature, and in utopian dreams.
 Innate biology seems to drive desires for justice and fairness, distinguishing
 good and evil, and craving good, rejecting evil.
 Modern sci-fi can map this onto the universe: as Carl Sagan has popularized:
 we are star-stuff, we are golden, and we've got to find our way back to
 the garden.
 All right, Joni Mitchell, then.
 Insofar as we are a part of the universe contemplating the universe itself,
 we are a part of the universe that distinguishes good and evil, and thirsts
 for good, i.e.
 for utopia.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ah, and now comes the question, the crux.
 How much of this universal craving for good, how much of that is due to
 quantum mechanics, quantum field theory, or whatever the physics of the
 universe we are in, and how much of it is pure math? So, for example, GPT
 is, in a sense, pure math.
 It is a purely digital creation.
 Digital transistors work because they isolate from noise: they provide
 very strong insulation from the environment.
 They allow for the creation of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

universes
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that are not 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

attached
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 to our own.
 Well, obviously, we can act on them, and obviously, we can give digital
 systems effectors.
 But in the abstract, what is computeed in CPU and RAM is isolated from
 our universe, except for the occasional cosmic ray that flips some bit
 here or there.
 So, in this sense, what is computed in CPU/RAM is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

pure math
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, existing in it's own private Platonic cave, isolated from our own.
 (And, for GPT, those bits are used to approximate the continuum of the
 real numbers, but that seems less important, for just right now.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And so, with digital computing, we are able to create universes of pure
 math, dettached from our own.
 What then happens to good and evil? I've postulated that the perception
 of good and evil are biologically based, and following Carl Sagan's reductionis
t arguments, good an evil are properties of molecules and atoms, and so
 perhaps properties of quantum field theory.
 That's where reductionism goes.
 But what about the isolatted mathematical system inside the CPU/RAM? Its
 not quantum, its classical, and it's isolated.
 How is a conception of good and evil supposed to permeate into that? Ahhh
 and here I have perhaps one answer: Panpsychism.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Aside from reductionism, we've got panpsychism.
 That's also where panpsychism goes.
 Panpsychism is deeply appealing and seemingly unavoidable.
 Panpsychism says that any complex structure is going to contain some fraction
 of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

feels
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and the more complex it gets, the more integrated information there is,
 the more sophisticated and thinking and capable of qualia it is.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hmm.
 So panpsychism does two things: it slays the philosophical zombie, in a
 very simple manner: by denying the possibility of the philosophical zombie.
 That is, if a system is sufficiently complex to exhibit 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

biological
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 behavior, it cannot be a zombie.
 The zombie is an illusion, its a philosophical daydream.
 Zombies don't exist.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Panpsychism also does another thing: it crosses the isolation barrier that
 CPU/RAM provides.
 Basically, if a system is sufficiently complex, it is psychic, and it does
 not matter if the substrate is transistors or QFT.
 So that suggests that conceptions of good and evil go with.
 The assumption here is that any psychic system, any system with qualia
 (i.e.
 everything) is capable of a perception of good and evil.
 That good and evil have a platonic reality, and are present and distinguishable
 in any system.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This suggests that purely digital AGI will be able to tell apart right from
 wrong, and even have some innate drive towards good, and away from evil.
 Is this drive entropic? (Unfortunately, one can still create evil systems.
 Evil cannot be banished.
 We can create a civilization-killing AGI.) But lets set this aside: is the
 drive away from evil and twoards good, is this entropic?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What do I mean by entropic, here? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(See? If I did not force myself to write, I would not have figured this
 out.
 It is not enough to free-wheel.
 One must force oneself to think.
 It is an act of will, to battle off baser hedonistic impulses, such as
 opium addiction.
 I mean, I do have to give some credit to genetics: I am predisposed to
 think abstractly.
 I do have the psychological profile typical of a physics PhD.
 And I am, in some sense, compelled to think and explore abstract thoughts.
 Is there a feedback loop, some hedonistic treadmill, that causes me to
 think deeply? Lets find out...)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Where was I? Entropy vs ergodicity.
 The Bernoulli process is ergodic.
 We can make ergodic odometers that eventually visit all possible states.
 These are, in a certain sense 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

purely uniform distributions
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and there is not really enough there to create an entropic gradient from
 evil to good.
 This is also at the limit of the idea of panpsychism: The Bernoulli process
 does not seem to have enough structure to ascribe to it a degree of psychic
 complexity.
 In the grand tradition, let us assign it a psychic level of zero.
 Insofar as the Bernoulli process is isomorphic to the Cantor set, then
 the same.
 And the Cantor set is isomorphic to the infinite binary tree.
 So we assign all three of these things (which are the same thing) a psychic
 level of zero.
 Insofar as the Bernoulli process implies the central limit theorem, the
 same there: Normal, Gaussian distributions are symptomaitic of zero psychic
 content.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So how does it get to be greater than zero? Well, the infinite binary tree
 is the universal cover for graphs.
 (The Menger sponge is the universal embedding.
 Which is *not* a cover! Related idea, but different.) So clearly, to get
 some other value...
 well, consider either a finite state machine, or a probabilistic finite
 state machine, or a finite state generator.
 All of these can be visualized via thier state transition graphs, and the
 amount of psychism we ascribe to those needs to be boiled down to that.
 Perhaps it is the integrated information.
 I now need to read about integrated information, since this is currently
 unknown/unclear to me, I need to be able to compute IIT for graphs, and
 stupid me, I don't know how to do this, yet.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Wo, should I continue writing, or should I take a break and read about IIT?
 Or take a break and do something else? Well, I'm taking a break, at any
 rate...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
9 May 2023
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It is very hard to wrte the above, because I am not expert in so many fields
 of academic inquiry.
 I simply am unaware of what others have done.
 But then, when I do try to broaden my scope, I am met with crap.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For example, I am reading the Wikipedia article about Slavoj Žižek.
 I see a paragraph about 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

subjectivity
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 which is obviously wrong, and is easily corrected.
 Should I even bother and waste time correcting it? Here's the key sentence:
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Box Boxed
position "t"
hor_pos "c"
has_inner_box 1
inner_pos "t"
use_parbox 0
use_makebox 0
width "100col%"
special "none"
height "1in"
height_special "totalheight"
thickness "0.4pt"
separation "3pt"
shadowsize "4pt"
framecolor "black"
backgroundcolor "none"
status open

\begin_layout Quotation
...
 nothing positive can be said about this subject, this 'I' that eludes symbolisa
tion; it cannot be discerned as anything but "that which cannot be symbolised".
 Thus, without the initial, attempted, failed symbolisation, subjectivity
 cannot present itself.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset

As a physicist, the answer is obvious: subjectivity is an ultrametric.
 We each, as subjects, live in deep, inaccessible holes, insulated, isolated
 from the world except what comes in from the senses and flows out via communica
tions.
 What goes on in my subjective experience is unknowable to the external
 world (well, that may changge with the ongoing development of brain-scanning
 machines...) and so myself as subject can be given a name – 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Linas
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, of course, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Linas Vepstas
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and that is a symbol.
 You may even have some idea of my inner life, based on this and other writings.
 But in the end, your model of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Linas
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is not 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

subjective me
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

; I exist outside the known universe, only weakly attached to it.
 And of course no symbol is sufficient to characterize subjecthood; symbols
 do not have information content, in and of themselves.
 For the Panpsychic, a symbol can only contain the information of the object
 to which it is applied, and, even then, assuming that information is accessible.
 The reader of this text does not have, and will never have a specific neural
 scan of the neurons that were firing as I wrote this, although, perhaps,
 they might one day be able to build a not-unreasable model.
 I am not unique, not that unqiue, I am human, there are othrers like me,
 we share brains structure and basal neural firing patterns.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What I just wrote above is so painfully obvious, that it begs credulity
 and sanity as to why I have to even say this out loud! And yet, the situation
 is absurd: others do not know what I know, and so I have to read some weird
 drivel that maybe Žižek actually beleives, or maybe he doesn't, as reformulated
 by some anonymous author in Wikipedia.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I have two problems with this.
 First, and most obvious: my own critique is superficial and shallow.
 It could be developed into something much charper and more precise.
 Perhaps someone has already done this.
 Second ..
 well, I forgot what I was thinking, already.
 Alas, it has fled into some unknown shadow of the mind, unknown even to
 conscious me.
 At any rate, I do have to engage in the process of thinking about this
 stuff, because it is the only way I can integrate new 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

information
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 into my world-model.
 Although 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

subject as symbol
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 barely seems to qualify as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

information
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 The other thing is that, once I've performed this integration, it is effectivel
y lost to the external universe unless I write about it.
 If I don't write about it, it will, at best, manifest itself in my other
 intellectual efforts in a very round-about kind of way.
 Or may not at all ...
 just forgotten.
 I've forgotten almost everything I've ever thought.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is an interesting AGI question: to what degree is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

forgetting
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 the thinking process important to performing thinking? Can one think, and
 record a permanent trace? What is the utility of that trace? Would it be
 a hinderance to future thinking? Perhaps forgetting is a vital and necessary
 unburdening? (Well, yes, of course it is, in the von Neumann architecture:
 I cannot rexamine everything on the disk drive every time I run some program.
 Bandwidth and bottlenecks prevent this.) Now, this is an idea woeth conemplating
 later.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
FYI.
 I will now stop writing here, and finish reading about Žižek and then continue
 reading another article on Croatian, Yugoslavian 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Southern European
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 sociology.
 I've taken a recent interest in cultural geopolitics.
 The Ukrainian war has triggered this.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Oh, hang on: another quote:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Box Boxed
position "t"
hor_pos "c"
has_inner_box 1
inner_pos "t"
use_parbox 0
use_makebox 0
width "100col%"
special "none"
height "1in"
height_special "totalheight"
thickness "0.4pt"
separation "3pt"
shadowsize "4pt"
framecolor "black"
backgroundcolor "none"
status open

\begin_layout Quotation
According to Žižek, these thinkers, in insisting on the role of the subject,
 run counter to "culturalist" or "historicist" positions held by thinkers
 such as Louis Althusser and Michel Foucault, which posit that "subjects"
 are bound by and reducible to their historical/cultural(/symbolic) context.
\end_layout

\end_inset

But of course, they are all correct, to a degree.
 We can start by saying 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

all humans are alike
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and then promptly know that this oversimplifies the situation.
 We can then try to categorize individual human subjects into the cultural
 milleu in which they live.
 After all, teh ideas that prattle about in my head must surely echo in
 the heads of others, as well.
 You can, to a large degree, categorize me according to my 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

identity politics
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

: I'm Lithuanian, I'm a physicist, I grew up fiddle with electronics, I
 smoked pot and listened to progressive rock, I grew up and made a string
 of poor career choices and life choices, and so here I am, and I am probably
 globally unique: all other Lithuanian physicists probably did not smoke
 pot or swim in the intellectual soup I swum in.
 But many many others are deeply embedded in the modern Western twitterati
 culture that I am in, and so their inner thoughts will not be all that
 different than my own, even if they are missing my characteristic childhood
 impressions.
 I dunno.
 What is Žižek really insisting on? The obvious? What are Althusser and
 Foucault saying? Were I to share a beer with them, I imagine they'd say
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Of course, Linas, you are right.
 But ...
 what you are missing is this...
 the forces on culture and history are not the forces of individuals, but
 of culture...
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

 ...
 or something like that.
 Of course I'm right.
 Of course, I'm missing something finer and more subtle.
 It has taken me at least ten miinutes if not longer to write the above;
 it would take the age of the universe to cover all of the finer details
 I have not available to me right now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And, alas, this is what I have left: cameraderie, the sharing of beers,
 with other finite, mortal thinkers, before we age, row senile, have a stroke
 and die.
 The minutes wasted in cameraderie are perhaps not wasted.
 I have empathy for others.
 But do not make infinite demands of my time.
 I must say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

no
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 sometimes.
 I must say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

no
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 to myself, sometimes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm reading more.
 Not sure why I bother.
 I figure I should know more about culutral philosophers are saying, because
 I wish to avoid 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

imposter syndrome
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, of pretending to know something I don't.
 But then, when I continue reading, they seem to all talk about 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

obvious stuff
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 None of it is all that deep, all that insightful, I nod my head and say
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

uh huh, uh huh
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 At best, it is morbid curiosity that makes me continue reading.
 Perhaps this is the miner's dilemma: low quality ore.
 There's something there; is it worth the effort? Does one mine this particular
 seam because one is attached to it, bound to it by love, familiarity, obsession
, curiosity? Is one loyal to an intellectual pursuit, or is it the activity
 of the habitue? All of these bindings, in my reductionist world-view, are
 just, again, feedback loops of neurotransmitters in my brain, urging me
 forward in this activity or that, keeping me loyal to my subjects of study,
 forcing an ergodic revisit of prior thoughts, or perhaps encouragin me
 to explore new territory.
 Perhaps I'm only crossing saddle points, in some mode of compunded hysteresis
 in my thoughts.
 Leding here, there, and jumping back.
 Slavve to the random prattling of my brain.
 Do I have free will, or am I an automaton compelled to read stupid Wikipedia
 summaries of slightly more clever Žižekian insights, which are of maybe
 dubious cleverness? Fuck fuck Fuck.
 The human condition I am condemed to endure.
 Not entirely free, anot entirely alive, yet free and alive.
 It is a crisis, a state of crisis.
 I canslip into my velvet rut, I can force a nervous breakdown.
 In either case, I crawl over mediocre intellectual pathways.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At least, that is my subjective experience, just right now.
 How do I know these are mediocre? Well, if my dog was thinking this stuff,
 it would be brilliant.
 But, for humans, not so much.
 How do I subjective recognize brilliance? Well, two ways, the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

a hah
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 moment, when my brain is chemically rewarded, instantaneously, for arriving
 at some great insight that was long pursued, and finally trapped.
 The other is in retrospect, looking back on one of one great creations,
 and understanding just how good it was.
 That the present pales in comparison, the rpesent does not match the heights
 one obtained earlier, even if the heights were not apparent back then.
 Perhaops one was too busy creating to savor the fruits of that creation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But all of these insights I just wrote above, again, I feel like these are
 ordinary, conventional insights.
 That anyone could have these ideas.
 That others have had them, in the past.
 That I am not assembling anything new, here.
 So what am I doing? Why am I doing it? Why bother? 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

What is the meaing of life
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

? Enough.
 Time to read some more.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
The End
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is the end of Part Ten of the diary.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
