#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\listings_params "basicstyle={\ttfamily},basewidth={0.45em}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Language Learning Diary - Part Five
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
Jan 2022 - present
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
The language-learning effort involves research and software development
 to implement the ideas concerning unsupervised learning of grammar, syntax
 and semantics from corpora.
 This document contains supplementary notes and a loosely-organized semi-chronol
ogical diary of results.
 The notes here might not always makes sense; they are a short-hand for
 my own benefit, rather than aimed at you, dear reader!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Part Five of the diary on the language-learning effort continues work on
 the English dataset.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Summary Conclusions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A summary of what is found in this part of the diary:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Nothing yet.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Expt-10 Merge exploration (Jan 2022)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The end of Diary Part Four describes a dataset with several thousand merged
 words in it.
 However, that dataset had assorted issues, and recreating it befor investing
 time in characterizing it seems like a good idea.
 There were numerous (and ongoing) bugfixes made.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ocnce these are done, the questions below arise.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Things worth exploring.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What have we actually got? Some questions about the dataset:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Distribution: size of word-class vs.
 rank.
 This was previously examined in 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

diary part one
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, page 99, for a different collection of merge algorithms (and earlier,
 different datasets).
 Do we still get something similar?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Above, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

size
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 might mean 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

number of words in the word-class
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 or it might mean 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

number of disjuncts in word-class
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 or it might mean 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

number of disjuncts in word-class with count weighting
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Oof.
 It would be nice to have a dashboard for this, instead of lots of manual
 work.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Distribution of word-senses.
 That is, how many words participate in more than one word-class? If they
 do participate in more than one word-class, what is the weight in each
 class?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
For words that belong to word-classes, what fraction of their weight remains
 unassigned to any word-class?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Distribution of MI of pairs of word-classes.
 We might hope that this is low, so that different word-classes are different
 from one another.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Distribution of self-MI of word-classes.
 One might hope that this is high, so that the word-classes do not share
 much in common with other words or word-classes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
As above, but distribution of MI of pairs consisting of a word-class, and
 a word.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Prior to starting the merge, there's an MI between words and disjuncts.
 I don't recall examining that in detail, before.
 Then, after the merge, how does this change?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
That's a lot of questions.
 Not clear which ones should be answered first.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Status
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Bug-fixing is maybe wrapping up ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I'm currently using `
\family sans
r9-sim-200.rdb
\family default
` for marginals plus the similarities for the top 200 most frequent words.
 Then run ...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
The End
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is the end of Part Five of the diary.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
