#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\listings_params "basicstyle={\ttfamily},basewidth={0.45em}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Language Learning Diary - Part Four
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
Sept 2021-present
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
The language-learning effort involves research and software development
 to implement the ideas concerning unsupervised learning of grammar, syntax
 and semantics from corpora.
 This document contains supplementary notes and a loosely-organized semi-chronol
ogical diary of results.
 The notes here might not always makes sense; they are a short-hand for
 my own benefit, rather than aimed at you, dear reader!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Part Four of the diary on the language-learning effort continues work on
 the English dataset.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Summary Conclusions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A short summary of what is found here:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Nothing yet...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Expt-7 – Merging – Sept 2021
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Time to open a new chapter.
 We are ready to merge word-pairs, with a mostly-trustworthy dataset.
 The goal here will be to merge just one word at a time, by hand, and see
 what happens.
 We're doing this because of the disastrously bad July 2021 merge attempt,
 which generated complete garbage, quite in contrast to the merges from
 previous years.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Part of the reason for the failure of the July merge was that the merge
 threshold was set much too low.
 Part of the problem is that the datasets had too much grunge in them; they
 needed to be trimmed.
 Part of the problem is that the default merge used a proxy for the common-MI
 value, based on ranking.
 Probably most of the failure can be ascribed to the first part: the merge
 threshold was set too low.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We've never studied the merges carefully, before.
 Mostly, they seemed to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

just work
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and we unleashed the machinery, and let it go.
 The first time, it worked, the second time, it failed.
 Anyway, now that we've got a better dataset, its worth looking at these
 in detail.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
The End
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is the end of the diary.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
