#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\listings_params "basicstyle={\ttfamily},basewidth={0.45em}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Language Learning Diary - Part Seven
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
March 2022 - present
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepštas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
The language-learning effort involves research and software development
 to implement the ideas concerning unsupervised learning of grammar, syntax
 and semantics from corpora.
 This document contains supplementary notes and a loosely-organized semi-chronol
ogical diary of results.
 The notes here might not always makes sense; they are a short-hand for
 my own benefit, rather than aimed at you, dear reader!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Part Seven of the diary on the language-learning effort opens the door to
 next steps.
 The last round of experiments appear to be successful, and there do not
 seem to be any nagging unresolved issues.
 What comes next?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Summary Conclusions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A summary of what is found in this part of the diary:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
No summary yet.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
The Possibilities
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The last round of experiments appear to be successful, and there do not
 seem to be any nagging unresolved issues.
 What comes next? Here's a list of possbilities.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\series bold
Accuracy Evaluation.

\series default
 Compare dictionaries to the hand-crafted LG English dict.
 This is a bit tedious and boring, since it seems unlikely to yeild anything
 interesting.
 It seems inevitable, as its the kind of thing other people want to see.
 The only benefit is that it is a way of perhaps characterizing the the
 effects of different parameter choices.
 In current runs, the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

noise
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 parameter is the most highly explored: but what setting yeilds the best
 results? Comparing to LG should reveal the answer.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\series bold
Data Cleanup.

\series default
 During pair-counting and/or MPG parsing, there is a bug that repeatedly
 escapes backslashes, leading to a cascade of backslashes in the dataset.
 This is just junk, and should be fixed.
 Fixing it will surely improve quality.
 It's tedious and boring.
 Two ways to fix: (1) start from scratch (2) hunt out multiple backslashes,
 and perform a custom merge, just like a word-class merge, but without forming
 a word-class.
 Option (2) is maybe easier and faster, but requires crafting custom code.
 Option (1) is foundationally better but time consuming.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\series bold
Improve accuracy (by iteration).

\series default
 Given the initial dictionaries, the corpus can be parsed with the LG parser,
 using those dictionaries.
 By maintaining counts of which disjuncts are actually used during parsing,
 we discover what is actually being used.
 These results can be used to cut down the word-classes, by eliminating
 those Sections that are rarely or never actually used during parsing.
 Such a trim helps reduce the dictionary size.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\series bold
Morphology.

\series default
 asdfasdf
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\series bold
Entities.

\series default
 asdfasdf
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\series bold
Synonyms.

\series default
 asdfasdf
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\series bold
References.

\series default
 asdfasdf
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
The End
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is the end of Part Six of the diary.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
