#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Messaging
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Thoughts about messaging and a relationship to grammar.
 Some old ideas, rephrased, some new ideas, incocomplete.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Two almost inrelated ideas, and one theme.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lets start with an obvious observation: natural language is used to transmit
 messages, from one human mind to another.
 Language carries messages.
 Painfully obviously.
 Now pair this with another idea: message-passing algorithms are a good
 way of solving NP-complete graphical constraint satisfaction problems.
 This pairing suggests a wild insight: that a collection of human minds,
 working together, are using message passing as a technique for collectively
 solving some difficult problem.
 To what degree can this insight be developed into a formal theory of the
 mind, and speciffically, a formalm theory of the collective, social mind?
 I don't know, and what follows below will be mostly unrelated to that,
 and will instead tackle grammar again, the grammar of natural language.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Grammar via Beleif Propagation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is a reprise of a recurring theme.
 Here, we formulate the grammar of natural language as a lexical grammar,
 using the Link Grammar formalism.
 The goal is to learn the grammar, using unsupervised techniques.
 The approach here is to treat it as a constraint satisfaction problem,
 and then use a generalized beleif-propagation algroithm, as inspired and
 described by Mézard and Mora
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "Mezard2008"

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To do so will require the articulation of a lot of notation to make things
 clear.
 A lot of this will repeat what I've written before.
 The other thing to point out is due to loops, etc.
 it won't be naive beleif propagation, but it will be Survey Propagation,
 as mentioned there....
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
bibfiles "lang"
options "tufte"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
