#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Search for Effectiveness
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
30 June 2025
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Personal letter containing extract from diary.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Preface
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Adam, This PDF is both a personal email and an extract from today's diary
 entry.
 Got home from my conference (Santara–Šviesa) and the below popped into
 my head while doing email chores.
 It touches on two things we talked about.
 Most important for you is perhaps the realization that any no–information–loss
 algorithm is a hill–climbing algo, and like any hill–climber, risks getting
 stuck at a local maximum.
 So this pours a little bit of cold water on hopefullness.
 But not all is lost; see below.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Rather than adapting the diary entry to you personally, its easier to just
 cut–n–paste.
 The first half for you will be entirely familiar and obvious; and as such
 I would ask that if you know of any papers that give more precise definitions
 and common notation, please send them to me.
 I'd rather not invent brand–new incompatible notation if that can be avoided.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Towards the middle I hit the hill–climbing dilemma.
 The meta–context is using graph generation and graph rewriting to explore
 monoids and the homorphisms (adjoint functors) between them, and to automatical
ly find (generate) optimizations for space–time performance.
 See below for details.
 At the end is the use of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

large structure models
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 (LSM's??) to correlate insn sequences, and the data they act on (in your
 demo, the Rubicks cube).
 The text might give some insight in why I want to tackle the general case.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Without further ado, the diary extract.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
