#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass llncs
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{url} 
\usepackage{slashed}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "cmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style splncs04
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\branch long-version
\selected 0
\filename_suffix 0
\color #faf0e6
\end_branch
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 11page%
\topmargin 8pheight%
\rightmargin 11page%
\bottommargin 10pheight%
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\listings_params "basicstyle={\ttfamily},basewidth={0.45em}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Underexplored Ideas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepštas 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
orcidID{0000-0002-2557-740X}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Institute
BrainyBlaze, OpenCog Foundation 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
email{<linasvepstas@gmail.com>}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
This paper presents a collection of ideas that appear to be commonly neglected
 or underappreciated in AGI systems thinking.
 They deserve a broader understanding and a broader audience.
 Most of these ideas are foundational; forward progress on any of them require
 far more than a few years by small research teams.
 I think they are all exciting.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Most or perhaps all the ideas described here are not original, and the careful,
 plugged–in attentive reader is likely to have heard of many of these in
 assorted forums.
 The goal here is to pull them all together into once place, to examine
 the relationships and connections.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Because the thoughts presented here are both disconnected and also inter–connect
ed, the introductory overview is best served by an outline:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Panpsychism vs.
 percolation as a model of intelligence as a phase transition.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Changes in network topologies cause phase transitions and social media is
 a radical change in network topology.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Agency and world models and self-awareness.
 and sensori-motor interfaces
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
genetics in Prusinkiewicz reaction-diffusion
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
inhibitory/excitatory upregulate/downregulate Aristotole law of excluded
 middle
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Speed of change shocks
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Hierarchical evidence and not just fuzziness.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Levin's Ingress idea
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Here and now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Free will.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Panpsychism or Percolation?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Many philosophical thinkers first approaching the question of intelligence
 and AGI soon find that the question is difficult enough, and the evidence
 so ambiguous and scattered that panpsychism becomes not just an appealing
 viewpoint, but even seems to get cemented into place with each new piece
 of evidence.
 There are various other ways; the one I wish to draw attention to comes
 from statistical mechanics and the idea of phase transitions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The simplest example has the name 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

percolation
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 The idea is simple: a fluid can flow through a solid, if the solid has
 enough pores and cavities to connect up and let it through.
 Dip a piece of tissue in water: the water will wick up and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

percolate
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 through.
 Hold a sponge under a water tap: the water will fall in, seep through and
 come out the bottom.
 That there is a phase transition is illustrated by fraking in the petroleum
 industry.
 If a rock is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

tight
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, old/gas will not flow.
 But if you break it, fracture it, open up cracks, then it will.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
That there is a phase transition is seen in the mathematical models of percolati
on.
 Imagine a square grid of points, disconnected.
 Now, randomly sprinkle edges onto that grid: if two points are connected
 by an edge then a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

fluid
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 can flow between them.
 How many edges have to be randomly sprinkled before two distant points
 are connected? Quite a lot: it turns out to be precisely 0.221...
 (ref Achime Kleinke 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

probability
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 book) Before this critical value, there simply is no flow.
 Above it, there is.
 This is a phase transition, and it is a first–order phase transition: it
 is sharp, going from off to on quite suddenly.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Perhaps the appearance of intelligence in nature works the same way? Below
 a certain threshold, we have dumb rocks and murmuring creeks; above the
 threshold, we have things the respond to stimuli, adapt and move.
 Of course, there won't be just one transition between smart and not–smart.
 A glance at the phase diagram for water shows dozens of phase transitions.
 For carbon, thousands and arguably infinite (diamond, graphite, sheets,
 buckyballs, ribbons...).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Is this a useful idea? Perhaps.
 If nothing else, it throws up a roadblock to the idea that even atoms are
 intelligent, and thus cuts off a line of research that seems fruitless.
 Is it difficult? Well, yes.
 We've had many decades of work on scale–free networks and self–organizing
 criticality, but very few of those touched on intelligence until Tononi
 and Tegmark raised the idea to prominence.
 Fine.
 But we seem to lack a network model, even a simple one, where, on one side,
 we can say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

not intelligent
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and on the other 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

yes, at least in this one specially defined way
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 This network could be a Markov logic network, a deep–learning neural net;
 don't care.
 Does it demonstrate phase transitions? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Social Media and Topology
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Phase transitions typically arise when the network topology changes.
 Before the advent of social media, the human brain–to–brain interconnection
 topology was hub–and–spoke.
 At the center, a single TV station, the hub.
 Around the edges, millions of viewers: the spokes.
 Mainstream media did not talk about flat–earth, because publishers and
 editors were too smart for that: they suppressed rank stupidity.
 Crazy uncle Don's audience was limited to the captive family at Thanksgiving.
 Social media changed how minds are connected to minds: it changed the wiring
 diagram.
 The endless list of current–day craziness issues can be traced back to
 this rapid, sudden change in the network topology.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This has happened before.
 Gutenberg's printing press ushered in the hub–and–spoke model.
 The ability of one author to sway the thoughts of thousands ushered in
 a civilizational boom.
 There was another phase transition before that: about three millennia ago,
 with the invention of the phonetic alphabet.
 Before that, learning to write in hieroglyphics meant being the smart kid
 in the village kidnapped by priests, and being force to learn to read and
 write for the next 10–15 years.
 After that, any shmuck of mildly above–average intelligence could memorize
 a mere 24 symbols, and the sounds associated with them.
 The ability to read and write created an economic boom in the Ancient Mediterra
nean.
 Will the present phase–change in network topology be a boon? I hope so.
 But the point here is to realize that 
\emph on
**this is what's going on**
\emph default
, instead of being perennially mystified by the situation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
btprint "btPrintCited"
bibfiles "../lang"
options "splncs04"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
